Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for parents and carers on supporting
children and young people’s mental health and
wellbeing during the coronavirus (COVID-19)
outbreak
Updated 30 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance on supporting children and young people’s mental health and wellbeing
Public Health
England
Contents
What you need to know
Background
Looking after your own mental health
Helping children and young people cope with stress
How children and young people of different ages may react
Children and young people who are accessing mental health services
What you need to know
The coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak is going to affect everyone’s daily lives, as the government and the NHS take
necessary steps to manage the outbreak, reduce transmission and treat those who need medical attention.
Regardless of their age, this may be a difficult time for children and young people. Some may react right away, while
others may show signs of difficulty later on.
How a child or young person reacts can vary according to their age, how they understand information and communicate,
their previous experiences, and how they typically cope with stress. Negative reactions may include worrying thoughts
about their health or that of family and friends, fear, avoidance, problems sleeping, or physical symptoms such as stomach
ache.
During this time, it’s important that you take care of your family’s mental health – there are lots of things you can do, and
support is available if you need it.
Background
This advice is to help adults with caring responsibilities look after the mental health and wellbeing of children or young
people, including those with additional needs and disabilities, during the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak.
For wider information on how to protect yourself and others, please seeCoronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do.
This guidance will be updated in line with the changing situation.
Looking after your own mental health
As well as thinking about the children or young people in your care, it is important to take care of your own mental health
and wellbeing. Children and young people react, in part, to what they see from the adults around them. When parents and
caregivers deal with a situation calmly and confidently, they can provide the best support for their children and young
people. Parents and caregivers can be more supportive to others around them, especially children, if they are better
prepared.
Please see advice on how tolook after your mental health and wellbeing during the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak or
visit Every Mind Matters for clear advice and actions to take care of your mental health and wellbeing.
Helping children and young people cope with stress
Here are some key points to consider about how you can support your child or young person:
Listen and acknowledge: Children and young people may respond to stress in different ways. Signs may be emotional
(for example, they may be upset, distressed, anxious, angry or agitated), behavioural (for example, they may become
more clingy or more withdrawn, they may wet the bed), or physical (for example, they may experience stomach aches).
Look out for any changes in their behaviour.
Children and young people may feel less anxious if they are able to express and communicate their feelings in a safe and
supportive environment. Children and young people who communicate differently to their peers may rely on you to
interpret their feelings. Listen to them, acknowledge their concerns, and give them extra love and attention if they need it.
Provide clear information about the situation: All children and young people want to feel that their parents and
caregivers can keep them safe. The best way to achieve this is by talking openly about what is happening and providing
honest answers to any questions they have. Explain what is being done to keep them and their loved ones safe, including
any actions they can take to help, such as washing their hands regularly.
Children and young people with learning disabilities
Autistic children and young people
Children or young people with physical health issues
Children and young people who care for others
Bullying
Money worries
Where to get further support
For support as a parent or carer
Use words and explanations that they can understand and make sure you use reliable sources of information such as the
GOV.UK or NHS website – there is a lot of misleading information from other sources that will create stress for you and
your family.
It will not always be possible to provide answers to all the questions children and young people may ask, or to allay all
their concerns, so focus on listening and acknowledging their feelings to help them feel supported.
Be aware of your own reactions:Remember that children and young people often take their emotional cues from the
important adults in their lives, so how you respond to the situation is very important. It is important to manage your own
emotions and remain calm, listen to and acknowledge children and young people’s concerns, speak kindly to them, and
answer any questions they have honestly.
See further guidance on how to look after your own mental wellbeingduring the outbreak.
Connect regularly: If it is necessary for you or your children to be in a different location to normal (for example, staying at
home in different locations or hospitalisation) make sure you still have regular and frequent contact via the phone or video
calls with them. Try to help your child understand what arrangements are being made for them and why in simple terms.
Create a new routine: Life is changing for all of us for a while. Routine gives children and young people an increased
feeling of safety in the context of uncertainty, so think about how to develop a new routine – especially if they are not at
school:
make a plan for the day or week that includes time for learning, playing and relaxing
if they have to stay home from school, ask teachers what you can do to support continued learning at home. Online
educational resources and activities to support children’s learning are available from the BBC
children and young people need to ideally be active for 60 minutes a day, which can be more difficult when spending
longer periods of time indoors. Plan time outside if you can do so safely or see Change4Life for some ideas for indoor
games and activities
don’t forget that sleep is really important for mental and physical health so try to keep to existing bedtime routines
it may be tempting to give them treats, such as sweets or chocolate, to compensate for being housebound, but this is
not good for their health, especially as they will not be able to be to run around or be as active as they normally do –
see Change4Life for ideas for healthy treats
Limit exposure to media and talk about what they have seen and heard:Children and young people, like adults, may
become more distressed if they see repeated coverage of the outbreak in the media. A complete news blackout is also
rarely helpful as they are likely to find out from other sources, such as online or through friends.
Try to avoid turning the television off or closing web pages when children or young people come into the room. This can
pique their interest to find out what is going on – and their imagination can take over. Instead, consider limiting the amount
of exposure you and your family get to troubling media coverage.
Young people will also hear things from friends and get information from social media. Talk to them about what is going on
and ask them what they have heard about. Try to answer their questions and reassure them in an age-appropriate
manner, avoiding too much detail.
How children and young people of different ages may react
All children and young people are different, but there are some common ways in which different age groups may react to a
situation like the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Understanding these may help you to know how to support your
family. The common reactions to distress will fade over time for most children and young people, though could return if
they see or hear reminders of what happened.
For infants to 2-year olds
Infants may become more easily distressed. They may cry more than usual or want to be held and cuddled more.
For 3 to 6-year olds
Preschool and kindergarten children may return to behaviours they have outgrown. For example, toileting accidents, bed-
wetting, or being frightened about being separated from their parents or caregivers. They may also have tantrums or
difficulty sleeping.
For 7 to 10-year olds
Older children may feel sad, angry, or afraid. Peers may share false information but parents or caregivers can correct the
misinformation. Older children may focus on details of the situation and want to talk about it all the time, or not want to talk
about it at all. They may have trouble concentrating.
For preteens and teenagers
Some preteens and teenagers respond to worrying situations by acting out. This could include reckless driving, and
alcohol or drug use. Others may become afraid to leave the home. They may cut back on how much time they connect
with their friends. They can feel overwhelmed by their intense emotions and feel unable to talk about them. Their emotions
may lead to increased arguing and even fighting with siblings, parents, caregivers or other adults. They may have
concerns about how the school closures and exam cancellations will affect them.
Children and young people who are accessing mental health services
Children and young people with an existing mental health problem may find the current uncertainty around the coronavirus
(COVID-19) outbreak particularly difficult. Their increased stress may lead to a change in their behaviours and their
mental health needs. If you are concerned about how to access support if they need to stay at home, you may want to
think about the following actions:
Speak to your child or young person’s mental health team
Contact your child or young person’s mental health team to discuss any concerns and check how care will continue to be
accessed while you are at home. Update any safety and care plans as agreed.
Identify how the support your child or young person normally receives can be maintained
Ask about having appointments by phone, text or online, and how their health professional can offer extra support if your
child or young person needs it.
If you usually have support in your home, check who you would need to contact in your local authority to let them know
you’re staying at home. Make sure it is clear if support is still needed for your child or young person.
If your child or young person has been admitted to an inpatient mental health unit, talk to the staff about their policies on
access to cell phones and think about how you can stay in contact, particularly if you have to stay at home. Ask the unit if
you could participate in a ‘virtual ward round’ so you can keep in touch with your child and/or young person’s mental health
team. If you need to stay at home this will also impact on whether your child or young person can come home on leave, so
talk to your child or young person about what might happen so they are fully informed.
If your child or young person becomes affected by coronavirus (COVID-19) they will need to be cared for appropriately, so
talk to the unit about what plans are in place should this happen and how best to communicate these to your child or
young person.
Plan how you will access medication
You might be able to order repeat prescriptions by phone. Or you may be able to do this online using an app or website, if
your doctor’s surgery offers this.
Ask your pharmacy about getting medication delivered or think about who you could ask to collect it for you. The NHS
website has more information about getting prescriptions for someone else and checking if you have to pay for
prescriptions.
Continue to order repeat prescriptions in your usual timeframe. There is no need to order for a longer duration or larger
quantities.
Your GP might convert your child or young person’s repeat prescription to one that is supplied under the repeat
dispensing arrangements, this means you can go back to the pharmacy for a certain number of repeats without having to
get a repeat prescription from the practice.
Be careful about buying medication online. You should only buy from registered pharmacies. You can check if a pharmacy
is registered on the General Pharmaceutical Council website.
You might also want to make arrangements for your child or young person if you become unwell, for example making sure
a partner, friend, family member or neighbour is aware of important information including their care plan, medications and
emergency numbers.
Children and young people with learning disabilities
Children and young people with learning disabilities can feel a loss of control in times of uncertainty such as the
coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. They may need extra words of reassurance, more explanations or adapted
explanations about the event, and more comfort and other positive physical contact from loved ones.
A good way to help them is by supporting their decisions, representing choices visually through written words, pictures,
symbol systems or objects if helpful, supporting them to express their emotions and letting them know they are not alone.
While listening, take their feelings seriously and don’t judge their emotions. They may feel anxious about big changes,
such as going to new places or the possibilities of having to stay at home for a long period.
Where possible, it can be helpful to explain any upcoming changes to routine and circumstances before they happen and
help them to plan and come up with solutions, such as finding a hobby or doing exercises to relax and cope with anxiety.
For useful tips for talking about feelings, seeSkills for Care advice. For further guidance on coronavirus (COVID19) for
those with learning disabilities please see the Mencap website, which includes easy-read materials.
Autistic children and young people
Irrespective of cognitive ability and language, autistic children and young people may struggle to identify any physical
symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19), as well as having difficulty talking about the emotions the situation will create. Keep
an eye out for changes in behaviour which may help you to identify their emotional state, as well as physical symptoms.
There is going to be disruption for all of us during the outbreak, for example, they may not be able to follow their normal
routines, or visit older family members, so help them to manage these changes using the typical strategies you know work
for your family.
It is important to be clear when communicating about the situation, how to stay safe and the symptoms of the virus. Try to
avoid giving definitive statements about the future – this is a rapidly developing situation and your child or young person
may be more distressed if things change when they were told they would not. Keep up to date with reliable information
about coronavirus (COVID-19).
If your child or young person becomes ill, they may struggle to manage the physical experience. You know what works
with your family, so help to manage this situation knowing what helps your child or young person.
You should continue to access support of local autism groups online or via the telephone. The
National Autistic Society
guidance on managing anxiety might also be helpful – you can call the Autism Helpline on 0808 800 4104 for further
advice.
Children or young people with physical health issues
Children or young people with long term physical health issues, such as those who need continuous use of a breathing
machine or are confined to a wheelchair or bed, may have stronger reactions to the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak.
They might have more intense distress, worry or anger than children without these issues because they have less control
over day-to-day wellbeing than other people. Support them by listening to their concerns, providing open and honest
explanations about the situation, and giving them information about what is being done to protect them.
You may also be concerned about how you will continue their care if you have to stay at home, or you may be worried
about infecting them. If you usually have support in your home, check who you would need to contact in your local
authority to let them know you’re staying at home. Make sure it is clear if support is still needed for your child or young
person.
For further information about the conditions that put children and young people at risk please see the guidance on
shielding and protecting people defined on medical grounds as extremely vulnerable
.
Children and young people who care for others
Some children and young people also have existing caring responsibilities for adults or siblings. They may be anxious
about what will happen if the person they care for becomes unwell, or what will happen if they themselves become unwell
and unable to support the person they care for. Even if they don’t currently act as a carer, it is possible that they may
become one if they are in a household with one adult.
Planning with your child or young person what will happen if you or another member of the family they care for or may
need to care for becomes unwell, including contact details for others who can step in and support them, will help to reduce
anxiety.
Bullying
Unfortunately, the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak has led to some individuals experiencing discrimination and
harassment, often because of their ethnicity or nationality. It is important to check that your children and young people are
not experiencing bullying or bullying others.
Explain that coronavirus (COVID-19) has affected and is likely to affect people from many countries, in many geographical
locations. Emphasise that your child or young person should be empathetic to anyone who has been affected, whatever
country or area they are from.
Remind your children and young people that everyone deserves to be safe at school, online and at home. Bullying is
always wrong, and we should each do our part to spread kindness and support each other. If they have been called
names or bullied at school, they should feel comfortable telling an adult whom they trust.
For more help and advice resources, please see theAnti-Bullying Alliance website.
Money worries
You may be worried about supporting your family if you have to stay home – this can have a big impact on your mental
health. For guidance on what your rights are at work, what benefits you are entitled and what further support is available
please see our guidance for employees or advice fromcitizens advice or the National Debt line.
Where to get further support
If you are worried about your or your child or young person’s symptoms, visit theNHS self-isolation advice website for
information. If you are still worried, call NHS 111.
If you are worried about your child or young person’s mental health, seek help from a professional. You may have services
attached to your child or young person’s school or college who can help. You could also contact your GP, or look up
information on children and young people’s mental health services on your local CCG website or on the NHS website.
In a medical emergency, call 999. This phone line should be used when someone is seriously ill or injured and their life is
at risk. A mental health emergency should be taken as seriously as a physical health emergency. For more advice on
where to get support for a mental health crisis, please see this NHS page.
For support as a parent or carer
Young Minds for Parents and Carers provides advice about mental health and behaviour problems in children and young
people up to the age of 25. You can call the parents’ and carers’ helpline on 0808 802 5544. Please be aware Young
Minds do not provide any direct psychological services and cannot make referrals to the NHS or Children and Young
People’s Mental Health Services (CYPMHS).
Helplines and websites for your child and or young person
If your child or young person would like to speak to someone anonymously, they could try calling a helpline or visiting
websites such as ChildLine and The Mix.
Shout provides free, confidential support, 24/7 via text for anyone at crisis anytime, anywhere.
You can:
text SHOUT to 85258 in the UK to text with a trained Crisis Volunteer
text with someone who is trained and will provide active listening and collaborative problem-solving
ChildLine provides a confidential telephone counselling service for any child with a problem. It comforts, advises and
protects.
You can:
call 0800 1111 any time for free
have an online chat with a counsellor
check out the message boards
The Mix provides a free confidential telephone helpline and online service that aims to find young people the best help,
whatever the problem.
You can:
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
call 0808 808 4994 for free – lines are open from 11am to 11pm every day
access the online community
email The Mix
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
