1
Mock Drill for Emergency Response for Handling
COVID -19 cases in Govt Hospitals
Setting Personnel Required Inventory/Activity/ Skills to be tested
1. Outpatients facilities/ Initial Triage
Consultation Room Healthcare workers
(Doctors and Nurses)
Physical examination of patients
with respiratory symptoms.
Inventory PPEs & Medicines, hand
washing and sanitizer facility.
Healthcare workers
(Doctors and Nurses)
Physical examination of patients
without respiratory symptoms but
based on self-declaration and /or
history
Cleaners After and between consultations
with patients with respiratory
symptoms; Disinfectants.
Waiting Room Well ventilated areas with Exhaust
Fans/Open Areas
2. Emergency /Inpatient facilities/Isolation Rooms and Duty Stations
Healthcare workers
(Doctors and Nurses)
 PPE
 Drugs & Disposable
 Oxygen Apparatus
 Suction Machine
 Hand washing and Hand sanitizer
facility
Cleaners Entering the room of COVID-19
patients with proper PPE
Laboratory Lab Technician Collection of Respiratory samples
Administrative Areas All staff, including
healthcare workers
Administrative tasks that do not
involve contact with COVID -19
patients but work on logistics and
supply and record maintenance.
Hand washing and hand sanitizer
facility.
2
Setting Personnel Required Inventory/Activity/ Skills to be
tested
3. ICU Facilities
ICUs Respiratory specialists
Anaesthesiologist
 ICU Nurses
 OT Technician
 PPEs
 Knowledge and skill as per
treatment protocols
 Oxygen supply
 Emergency medicines
 Monitors
 Defibrillators
 Ventilators
4. Ambulance or transfer vehicle (For shifting to Tertiary Care Centre )
Healthcare workers Transporting suspected COVID-19
patients to the referral healthcare
facility.
Driver with Paramedical
workers
Involved only in driving the patient
with suspected COVID-19 disease
and the driver’s compartment is
separated from the main
compartment.
Assisting with embarkation
/disembarkation of patient with
suspected COVID-19 disease.
Cleaners Cleaning and disinfection after and
between transport of patients with
suspected COVID-19 disease to the
referral healthcare facility
5. Details of Tertiary Care Centre (Contact No. of Nodal Person and Emergency
No.) are available
General Tips:
1. In addition to using the appropriate PPE, frequent hand hygiene and respiratory
hygiene should always be performed. PPE should be discarded in an appropriate
waste container after use, and hand hygiene should be performed before putting on
and after taking off PPE.
3
2. The number of visitors should be restricted. If visitors must enter a COVID-19
patient’s room, they should be provided with clear instructions about how to put on
and remove PPE and about performing hand hygiene before putting on and after
removing PPE; this should be supervised by a healthcare worker.
3. This category includes the use of no-touch thermometers, thermal imaging cameras,
and limited observation and questioning, all while maintaining a spatial distance of
at least 1 m.
4. All rapid response team members must be trained in performing hand hygiene and
how to put on and remove PPE to avoid self-contamination.
Laboratory investigations (i) All kits required for collection (Respiratory samples like
Nasopharyngeal Swab, Sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage) such as swabs, VTMs, Zip
Lock Bag & Cold Chain etc. are available (ii) All lab investigations of a COVID-19
suspect case should be restricted to a bare minimum as deemed appropriate by the
treating physician till such time as the confirmatory COVID-19 tests are made available.
After confirmation proper bio safety precautions should be observed if any invasive
investigations are done.
Assessment of Healthcare workers
Doctors, Nurses, Technicians should undergo knowledge assessment along with skill
assessment and if needed the requisite training should be provided to fill the gaps. A
Microbiologists should be posted for Supervising the samples collection from the
patients in a proper way and ensuring the transportation of sample to designated
laboratories for testing under appropriate condition including maintenance of cold chain
for this purpose.
Public Health Specialist should be engaged to advise about the reduction of infection
in the medical care facility. They will also supervise the handing over of discharged
patients to State Surveillance teams for monitoring and tracking these patients till the
requisite period is over. They will also supervise proper biomedical waste disposal of
the healthcare facility.
