From the Secretary of State for Foreign & Commonwealth Affairs and the
Secretary of State for Transport
Foreign & Commonwealth Office
King Charles Street
London, SW1A 2AH
Department for Transport
Great Minster House, 33 Horseferry Rd
London SW1P 4DR
27 March 2020
GETTING BRITISH NATIONALS HOME: GOVERNMENT-ASSISTED RETURNS
BY AIR
The Government is working intensively with its international partners to keep air
routes and critical transit hubs open to enable British travellers to return to the UK by
commercial means wherever possible. This should always be their first resort.
We acknowledge that this is a challenging time for airlines both operationally and
financially. The Government will continue to work non-stop around the world to keep
routes open. At the same time, we recognise that thousands of travellers have been
affected by flight cancellations and need to find alternative routes or change their
tickets. It is essential that airlines meet this need and offer their passengers the
service they deserve, including alternatives where routes are cancelled to allow them
to change tickets – including between carriers – as quickly and cheaply as possible.
The situation is evolving constantly. Closures of airspace and travel restrictions now
mean that for many British travellers there is no longer a commercial option. In view
of these unprecedented challenges, we welcome your agreement to work in
partnership with the Government to help stranded British travellers get back home to
the UK.
This will be a joint effort in the national interest. The Government will lead the charge
with airlines as our commercial partner. To facilitate this, we have agreed that the
Government will commission a series of special charter flights that you will operate
on a strict cost recovery basis paid by the taxpayer. These flights will be booked and
ticketed centrally, through a Government-procured travel management company. All
the fares will be at an affordable level determined by the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office (FCO). Those genuinely unable to pay will be offered an
emergency loan by the FCO if they have exhausted all other avenues.
The FCO will lead this programme of special flights. The Department for Transport
(DfT) and Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) will continue to provide senior strategic
engagement alongside operational support. DfT and CAA personnel will be
embedded within a central planning and delivery unit led by the FCO that will work
2
through the FCO’s overseas network in priority countries to secure agreement for
special flights.
We have agreed to focus our efforts on helping British travellers overseas and their
direct family members get home to the UK, not British overseas residents.
We will prioritise the places where commercial routes no longer exist and where
large numbers of British travellers are stranded. We will continue to focus on those
who are vulnerable due to age or underlying medical conditions, taking local
healthcare and security situations into consideration. It is important that we assess
how people can move within a country in order to assemble for special return flights,
and whether aircraft can safely access a location.
Flights and passengers will be transported in line with Public Health England advice.
These special flights are not intended for symptomatic passengers. Those unable to
travel should follow our advice to self-isolate, and the medical and other advice of
the local authorities. We will continue to provide them with all the consular support
we can.
FCO Travel Advice will be our primary public communications channel. We will
update it regularly to provide stranded Britons with the latest information about new
departure options. We will also advertise our special flights in-country.
This situation is unprecedented, and our priorities and departure options are liable to
change. We may need to withdraw flights if an aircraft is unable to access a location
safely, or if demand for repatriation from that location is low. We will establish a clear
operational flight programme and commercial contracting mechanisms jointly with
you. We kindly ask you to be flexible, and ready to have flights available at short
notice.
The Coronavirus crisis is a challenge unlike any we have faced in generations. By
working together, we send a strong message of reassurance to Britons stranded
overseas. We will do our best to bring people home, and help reunite families and
loved ones.
Yours ever,
The Rt Hon Dominic Raab MP
Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs
The Rt Hon Grant Shapps MP
Secretary of State for Transport
