Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: guidance for Ambulance Trusts
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for Ambulance Trusts
Public Health
England
This guidance including additional donning and doffing guidance is also available through the Joint Royal Colleges
Ambulance Liaison Committee (JRCALC) plus app (if available in your Trust).
Contents
1. Identification of possible cases
2. On-scene clinician precautions
3. Personal protective equipment (PPE)
4. Patient assessment
5. Conveyance and patient handover
6. Post conveyance
7. Decontamination
Latest updates to this page
Updated with detail on case definitions, clarification ofAGPs and updates to PPE throughout.
1. Identification of possible cases
This guidance is for possible and confirmed cases of COVID-19 where an ambulance response is required, including both
emergency and non-emergency provision.
COVID-19 infection should be considered in all cases of respiratory infection. A travel history is no longer a requirement
for determining a possible case. If patients meet the below criteria they are to be classified as a possible or confirmed
case.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Or
High temperature (of 37.8°C or higher)
And at least one of the following which must be of acute onset:
Persistent cough (with or without sputum), hoarseness, nasal discharge or congestion, shortness of breath, sore throat,
wheezing or sneezing
Where possible or confirmed cases are identified, this information must be passed to the responding resources
(ambulance, PTS or response car) prior to arrival on scene.
2. On-scene clinician precautions
This guidance covers the use of personal protective equipment (
PPE) for the management and transfer of a patient with
possible or confirmed COVID-19. Staff should perform a dynamic risk assessment which should include information
provided prior to arrival at scene. Where the risk assessment indicates a requirement for PPE crews, they should don the
appropriate level before being within 2 metres of the patient.
The risk assessment should include information provided prior to arrival at scene as well as any additional information
gained on arrival. See section 3 for the appropriate level ofPPE to be worn.
The patient should be provided with a surgical face mask to wear for the duration of the care (if tolerated) unless oxygen
therapy is indicated.
Where possible, only one crew member would need to donPPE if the patient can be managed by a single person, this
leaves the driver free to perform the transfer and/or admission without having to remove PPE and decontaminate before
driving.
2.1 Aerosol generating procedures (AGP)
AGPs generate tiny particles, small enough to remain in the air for extended periods, travel long distances and may be
inhaled.
If an AGP is to be performed, all crew members must don level 3PPE before being within 2 metres of the patient.
AGPs relevant to the ambulance service, which have been determined as anAGP by Public Health (England, Scotland,
Wales and Ireland) and NERVTAG include:
procedures related to cardiopulmonary resuscitation, for example advanced airway procedures such as
laryngoscopy, intubation, extubation and surgical airway
manual ventilation
suctioning
management of choking and foreign body airway obstruction removal
The following are not considered as anAGP:
chest compressions
defibrillation
nebulisation
2.2 Key points
PPE must be worn by all staff who have direct contact with a possible or confirmed COVID-19 patient and within 2
metres of the patient
if the vehicle has a closed bulkhead between the patient compartment and cab thenPPE must NOT be worn while
driving or within the vehicle cab
if there is no closed bulkhead between the patient compartment and cab then it may be necessary to wear a fluid
repellent surgical mask, if the patient will be within 2 metres of the driver while being conveyed
unless absolutely essential, AGPs should be avoided during the transportation of patients with COVID-19
3. Personal protective equipment (PPE)
The appropriate level of PPE should be worn following a risk assessment of the presenting risks, and staff should not wear
a higher level of PPE than is required.
This use of PPE as described below should not detract from the usual infection prevention and control (
IPC) risk
assessments that staff carry out routinely to underpin all clinical practice and decision making. Staff should also ensure the
correct level of PPE is worn dependant on the patient presentation and the clinical skills that are required during patient
care.
The ambulance sector PPE for COVID-19 is categorised by level:
Level 1: Standard infection control precautions
Consider if any PPE is required based on risk of contact or splashing with blood or bodily fluids
Level 2:
Disposable gloves
Disposable apron
Fluid repellent surgical mask
Eye protection (if risk of splashing)
Level 3:
Disposable gloves
Fluid repellent coveralls
FFP3 or powered respirator hood
Eye protection
The required level of PPE that is recommended to be used as a minimum for the care of all possible or confirmed COVID-
19 cases, can be found in the infection prevention and control guidance.
3.1 Correct use of PPE
the appropriate level of PPE should be worn following the risk assessment of the presenting risks, and staff should not
wear a higher level of PPE than is required
care should be taken to ensure thatPPE is donned and doffed correctly to avoid inadvertent contamination
all used PPE must be disposed of as category B clinical waste and any reusable items (for example eye protection or
powered respirator hoods) must be decontaminated according to manufacturer or Trust instructions
FFP3 face masks must only be used by staff who have been fit tested for the mask they are using, and staff must
complete a fit check every time they are required to wear one
powered respirator checks must be performed before each use, in accordance with the trust instructions, including a
battery check
although FFP3 masks are effective for longer periods, the general recommendation would be to wear the FFP3 face
masks for up to 3 hours. However, the duration of wear is dependent on the outcome of a dynamic risk assessment
conducted by the staff member taking into consideration a number of factors such as the environment, personal
comfort/tolerance and the activity or task that is being undertaken
fluid repellent surgical face masks can be worn for the entire patient care episode, the Health and Safety Executive
(HSE) has confirmed that the masks can be worn until damaged or wet
3.2 Considerations for cardiac arrests
The majority of patients who get COVID-19 will have mild symptoms, and it is estimated about 4% to 5% may be critically
ill.
In the event of a patient being unconscious or in cardiac arrest it will not always be possible to determine the potential
COVID-19 risk of the patient. Therefore, it is recommended that staff wear an apron, surgical mask and eye protection as
a minimum.
If any information indicates there is a potential risk of COVID-19 then don a FFP3 face mask prior to undertaking any
AGPs. It may be necessary for one person to undertake compression only CPR or minimal airway interventions, and
defibrillation (if required) while another dons the appropriate PPE. The first person should don their FFP3 prior to
commencing any AGPs.
3.3 Donning PPE
PPE is required for all possible or confirmed COVID-19 patients and should be donned in the following order:
3.4 Level 2 PPE
1. Disposable apron.
2. Fluid repellent surgical mask.
3. Eye protection if risk of splashing to the face and eyes.
4. Disposable gloves.
Level 3 PPE (FFP3 and eye protection)
1. Fluid repellent coverall.
2. FFP3 face mask.
3. Eye protection.
4. Disposable gloves - double glove if wearing a coverall (this reduces risk of contamination when removing the coverall).
Level 3 PPE (powered respirator hood)
1. Fluid repellent coverall.
2. Powered respirator hood.
3. Disposable gloves - double glove if wearing a coverall (this reduces risk of contamination when removing the coverall).
3.5 Doffing PPE
It is important that the PPE is removed to minimise the potential for cross-contamination.
When doffing PPE, follow the order below with the support and observation of your crew mate to ensure the risk of cross-
contamination is minimised.
Hand decontamination helps to prevent the spread of infection. Use alcohol hand rub between removing items of
PPE and
wash your hands, wrists and forearms once all PPE is removed.
Level 2 PPE
1. Disposable gloves.
2. Hand decontamination.
3. Disposable apron.
4. Eye protection (if worn).
5. Hand decontamination.
6. Fluid repellent surgical mask.
7. Hand decontamination.
Level 3 PPE (FFP3 face mask and eye protection)
1. Outer pair of gloves.
2. Coveralls.
3. Inner pair of gloves.
4. Hand decontamination.
5. Eye protection.
6. Hand decontamination.
7. FFP3 face masks.
8. Hand decontamination.
Level 3 PPE (powered respirator hood)
1. Outer pair of gloves.
2. Respirator hood.
3. Coveralls.
4. Inner pair of gloves.
5. Hand decontamination.
4. Patient assessment
The recommended advice for possible and confirmed COVID-19 patients with mild symptoms is for them to stay at home
until they are well. See the stay at home advice.
Following the patient assessment and determination of a possible COVID-19 patient, crews should consider if the patient
needs to be conveyed to hospital. This may vary with local protocols and should be discussed with the COVID-19
coordination service (if not dispatched by them).
4.1 Care of the deceased
Those handling bodies should be aware that there is likely to be a continuing risk of infection from the body fluids and
tissues of cases where COVID-19 is identified. The usual principles of standard infection control precautions (SICPs) and
transmission-based precautions (TBPs) apply for bodies that are possible or confirmed COVID-19. As a minimum, the
PPE required for handling a deceased possible or confirmed COVID-19 patient is gloves, apron and fluid repellent surgical
mask. For more information, see guidance for care of the deceased.
5. Conveyance and patient handover
If the patient requires conveyance it is important to contact the receiving unit to have a discussion regarding where to
take the patient as this may not be the usual area within the hospital.
If possible COVID-19 patients require conveyance, they must be conveyed in isolation and are not permitted to be
cohorted, unless they are members of the same household.
If required, confirmed COVID-19 patients may be cohorted with other confirmed patients (numbers dependant on
vehicle size and limitations).
If community screening is available within the area, then follow the local protocol.
If the patient requires conveyance they will require conveying to, and assessment at, an infectious disease unit (
IDU) or
emergency department (ED), as per local agreements, and with an appropriate pre-alert and discussion before leaving
the scene.
5.1 Utilising the most appropriate conveying resource
Possible cases must not be conveyed by:
car
air ambulance
For vehicles where there is no closed bulkhead:
if the patient is over 2 metres away from the driver there is no requirement for the driver to wear
PPE during
conveyance
the patient must, wherever possible, wear a surgical mask during transportation
The following guidance applies whenever a patient is conveyed:
1. Consider the removal of non-essential equipment from the vehicle or moving non-essential equipment to a closed
compartment prior to loading the patient in the vehicle.
2. Avoid opening cupboards and compartments unless essential, if equipment is likely to be required then remove from
the cupboard prior to loading patient.
3. Consider if alternative transport options are available in liaison with Ambulance Control Room (
ACR).
4. Air conditioning or ventilation on vehicles must be set to extract and not recirculate the air within the vehicle (where
possible).
5. Non-essential persons (such as observers, family members) are not to travel within the patient compartment with a
possible or confirmed case, unless the patient is a child who requires conveyance, in this case it is acceptable for a
parent or guardian to accompany the child.
6. Family members and relatives of these patients must be asked to remain at home and not attend the hospital. They
should be left with contact details for the hospital you are conveying the patient to and asked to phone later for an
update before visiting.
7. Observers should, where possible, be taken to the nearest ambulance station. If this is not possible, they should
remain in the cab of the vehicle for the duration of the incident and the ACR should be notified.
Pre-alert
Crews are required to notify the receiving unit to the fact that they are conveying a possible or confirmed COVID-19
patient and provide an expected time of arrival (ETA) to ensure the receiving unit can prepare for arrival and patient
isolation. The receiving unit will advise the crew where the patient should be brought, as it may not be the ED.
On arrival
The driver is to inform the receiving unit of their arrival prior to off-loading the patient. The receiving unit is required to
support the offloading of the patient into the department, ensuring the route is clear.
6. Post conveyance
All linen should be managed as per local policy for the management of infectious linen at the receiving unit.
All waste should be disposed of as category B clinical waste, as per local policy, at the receiving unit.
The crew are to removePPE in the designated area identified within the receiving unit.
All disposable PPE is to be disposed of as category B clinical waste, as per local policy, at the receiving unit.
7. Decontamination
As coronaviruses have a lipid envelope, a wide range of disinfectants are effective.PPE and good infection prevention and
control precautions are effective at minimising risk but can never eliminate it.
If an alternative disinfectant is used within the organisation, the local Infection Prevention and Control Team (
IPCT) should
be consulted on this to ensure that this is effective against enveloped viruses.
It is possible that these viruses can survive in the environment with the amount of virus contamination on surfaces likely to
have decreased significantly by 72 hours, so thorough environmental decontamination is vital.
Where equipment is used on-scene for assessing/ treating patients, which are not conveyed the equipment can be
decontaminated using universal sanitising wipes or equivalent approved disinfectant.
7.1 Possible or confirmed COVID-19 patient with no AGP procedures required
The vehicle will require an enhanced clean between patients to ensure thorough decontamination of all exposed surfaces,
equipment and contact areas before it is returned to normal operational duties, with universal sanitising wipes or a
chlorine-based product.
Appropriate PPE must be worn to decontaminate the vehicle - as a minimum, this should include apron and gloves.
Any exposed equipment (that is not within closed compartments) left on the vehicle will require decontamination with
universal sanitising wipes or equivalent, as per the standard between patient clean.
All contact surfaces (cupboards, walls, ledges), working from top to bottom in a systematic process, will require
decontamination.
Pay special attention to all touch points.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Ensure that the stretcher is fully decontaminated, including the underneath and the base.
The vehicle floor should be decontaminated with a detergent solution, this should be at a minimum of the end of every
shift, more frequently where facilities exist.
Where possible, hospitals should support this practice by working with ambulance colleagues to identify access to
appropriate sluice facilities and designated mop and bucket storage for ambulance use.
7.2 Possible or confirmed COVID-19 requiring AGP procedure (such as intubation, suctioning, or
cardiopulmonary resuscitation)
The vehicle will require an enhanced decontamination of all exposed surfaces, equipment and contact areas before it is
returned to normal operational duties, with a chlorine-based product (or approved equivalent).
Appropriate PPE must be worn to decontaminate the vehicle - as a minimum, this should include apron and gloves
(follow COSHH guidance for protective equipment when using chlorine).
Any exposed equipment (that is not within closed compartments) left on the vehicle will require decontamination with a
universal detergent followed by chlorine-based solution at 1,000 parts per million (or approved equivalent disinfectant).
Starting from the ceiling of the vehicle and working from top to bottom in a systematic process, all exposed surfaces will
require decontamination with a universal detergent followed by a chlorine-based solution at 1,000 parts per million (or
approved equivalent).
Pay special attention to all touch points.
Ensure that the stretcher is fully decontaminated, including the underneath and the base.
The vehicle floor should be decontaminated with a detergent solution followed by a chlorine-based solution at 1,000
parts per million (or approved equivalent), this should be facilitated by the receiving department.
Where possible hospitals should support this practice by working with ambulance colleagues to identify access to
appropriate sluice facilities and designated mop and bucket storage for ambulance use.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
