Epidemiological Investigations and Preventive Measures Underway in
Response to Norovirus Cases at PyeongChang [Feb. 7 (Wed.), 2018]
Person in charge: : Lee Hye-Rim (Division of Infectious Disease Control,
043-719-7127, lhr1234@korea.kr)

◇ POCOG, KCDC, MFDA, and the PyeongChang County Public Health Center are
conducting joint epidemiological investigations at the Horeb Odaesan Youth
Center in response to cases of diarrhea in PyeongChang
◇ Sanitary inspections of communal dining areas and monitoring of diarrhea
patients have been strengthened

□ The POCOG, KCDC, MFDA, PyeongChang County Public Health Center, and
other relevant institutions are conducting epidemiological investigations on
and implementing preventive measures for norovirus cases at the site of
the PyeongChang Winter Olympics.
□ According to the POCOG (Committee President Lee Hee Beom), KCDC,
MFDA, and the PyeongChang County Health Center are currently
conducting a joint epidemiological investigation at the Horeb Odaesan
Youth Center. As of Tuesday, February 6th, they have interviewed 1,025
individuals at the center and obtained samples for further testing.
○ There have been 21 confirmed cases of norovirus infection, all of whom
are in good condition and currently quarantined within the center. Other
residents have been isolated as necessary based on their symptoms, and
further steps will be taken once their test results have been received.
○

Suspected sources of infection include cooking with ground water,
contaminated food handlers and consumption of contaminated food
products.
The MFDA and the Ministry of Environment conducted an
initial investigation of the water at the youth center over the course of
five days, and tests came back negative for norovirus.

□ Through the patient monitoring system with medical institutions and
polyclinics, public health authority received reports of diarrhea patients.
As of February 6th, 11* of these patients were confirmed to have been
infected with norovirus.
○ They received proper treatment and are currently under self-quarantine at
home. Epidemiological investigations are currently underway to determine
possible routes of transmission and contacts.

- 1 -

* 8 Korean nationals, 3 foreign nationals

□ Measures are being taken at every level of public health and other relevant
institutions to prevent any further spread of infection.
※ As on-site epidemiological investigations are currently underway, additional
information and revisions to the above content will be provided accordingly.

- 2 -

