SPOTLIGHT
• On the 30th of April 2020, 7 new cases of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 were announced by the
Ministry of Public Health of Thailand (MoPH), bringing the total number of cases to 2,954.
• Of these, more than 90% (2,687) have recovered, about 1.8% (54) have died, and about 7% (213) are
receiving treatment.
• Zero deaths were reported today.
• No cases were reported from the regular surveillance system and health care services.
• Four cases were reported in Phuket and Krabi through community active case finding.
• Three cases were reported in persons returned from other countries and were held in state quarantine.
• To date, 68 of 77 provinces have reported cases. Of the 68 provinces, 23 reported no new cases during
the past 28 days.
UPDATE FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND
• The Government has extended the emergency decree from 30th April to 31st May 2020.
• As the number of new cases in Thailand continues to drop to single digits, the Government will ease
some measures while continuing to maintain some measures to reduce transmission.
• The approach to relaxing measures is based primarily on public health factors, while taking into account
social and economic factors.
• It is vital that people keep cleaning surfaces, wearing a mask, washing their hands and keeping a safe
distance of at least 1 metre from other people in public
213
Hospitalized
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND
SITUATION
IN THE PAST
24 HOURS
54
Deaths
(0 new)
103
Health care
staff cases
2,687
Recovered
Confirmed
(7 new)
2,954
30 April 2020 WHO Thailand Situation Report
Which measures will continue until 31st May?
Domestic
• Curfew between the hours of 10pm and 4am
• Avoid movement between provinces. Domestic flights are allowed but must be operated following
standards/requirements.
International
• Strict limitations on all modes of travel entering Thailand (land, sea, air) and state/local quarantine for all
people entering the country.
• All international commercial flights are restricted, except for certain purposes such as cargo aircraft and
repatriation of Thais living abroad.
• All migrants entering the country through borders will be subject to quarantine for 14 days.
Reducing risk factors
• Sale of alcohol is banned
• Restriction of mass gatherings
• 50% of people should work-at-home
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand is in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public Health,
sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health to support
migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand.
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English, please visit.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit.
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO, please visit.
USEFUL
LINKS
World Health Organization Country Office for Thailand
4th Fl., Permanent Secretary Bldg.3 Ministry of Public Health,
Nonthaburi Thailand, 11000
Media queries sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
WHOThailand
WHOThailand
@WHOThailand
www.who.int/thailand
For latest updates and resources, please visit:
