Revision 1:
Guidelines for Handling, Treatment and Disposal of Waste Generated during
Treatment/Diagnosis/ Quarantine of COVID-19 Patients
25th
March, 2020
(In suppression earlier guidelines upload at CPCB website on 19/03/2020)
Central Pollution Control Board
(Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change)
Parivesh Bhawan, East Arjun Nagar
Delhi – 110032
Guidelines for Handling, Treatment, and Disposal of Waste Generated during
Treatment/Diagnosis/ Quarantine of COVID-19 Patients – Rev. 1
Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi
2 | P a g e
In order to deal with COVID-19 pandemic, State and Central Governments have initiated various steps,
which include setting up of quarantine centers/camps, Isolation wards, sample collection centers and
laboratories.
Following specific guidelines for management of waste generated during diagnostics and treatment
of COVID-19 suspected / confirmed patients, are required to be followed by all the stakeholders
including isolation wards, quarantine centers, sample collection centers, laboratories, ULBs and
common biomedical waste treatment and disposal facilities, in addition to existing practices under
BMW Management Rules, 2016.
These guidelines are based on current knowledge on COVID-19 and existing practices in management
of infectious waste generated in hospitals while treating viral and other contagious diseases like HIV,
H1N1, etc. These guidelines will be updated if need arises. This Revision-1 of guidelines is done mainly
to incorporate specific requirements and responsibilities of persons operating quarantine camps or
caretakers of quarantine homes/home-care units and also the responsibilities of Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) at sections (c) and (f) respectively. Specific provisions are also incorporated for States not
having common CBWTFs and for allowing hazardous waste incinerators to dispose COVID-19 waste.
Guidelines brought out by WHO, MoH&FW, ICMR, CDC and other concerned agencies from time to
time may also be referred.
Guidelines for handling, treatment and disposal of COVID-19 waste at Healthcare Facilities,
Quarantine Camps/ Quarantine-homes/ Home-care, Sample Collection Centers, Laboratories,
SPCBs/PCCs, ULBs and CBWTFs is give below;
(a) COVID-19 Isolation wards:
Healthcare Facilities having isolation wards for COVID-19 patients need to follow these steps to ensure
safe handling and disposal of biomedical waste generated during treatment;
- Keep separate color coded bins/bags/containers in wards and maintain proper segregation of
waste as per BMWM Rules, 2016 as amended and CPCB guidelines for implementation of BMW
Management Rules.
- As precaution double layered bags (using 2 bags) should be used for collection of waste from
COVID-19 isolation wards so as to ensure adequate strength and no-leaks;
- Collect and store biomedical waste separately prior to handing over the same CBWTF. Use a
dedicated collection bin labelled as “COVID-19” to store COVID-19 waste and keep separately
in temporary storage room prior to handing over to authorized staff of CBWTF. Biomedical
waste collected in such isolation wards can also be lifted directly from ward into CBWTF
collection van.
- In addition to mandatory labelling, bags/containers used for collecting biomedical waste from
COVID-19 wards, should be labelled as “COVID-19 Waste”. This marking would enable CBWTFs
to identify the waste easily for priority treatment and disposal immediately upon the receipt.
- General waste not having contamination should be disposed as solid waste as per SWM Rules,
2016;
Guidelines for Handling, Treatment, and Disposal of Waste Generated during
Treatment/Diagnosis/ Quarantine of COVID-19 Patients – Rev. 1
Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi
3 | P a g e
- Maintain separate record of waste generated from COVID-19 isolation wards
- Use dedicated trolleys and collection bins in COVID-19 isolation wards. A label “COVID-19
Waste” to be pasted on these items also.
- The (inner and outer) surface of containers/bins/trolleys used for storage of COVID-19 waste
should be disinfected with 1% sodium hypochlorite solution daily.
- Report opening or operation of COVID-19 ward and COVID ICU ward to SPCBs and respective
CBWTF located in the area.
- Depute dedicated sanitation workers separately for biomedical waste and general solid waste
so that waste can be collected and transferred timely to temporary waste storage area.
(b) Sample Collection Centers and Laboratories for COVID-19 suspected patients
Report opening or operation of COVID-19 sample collection centers and laboratories to concerned
SPCB. Guidelines given at section (a) for isolation wards should be applied suitably in in case of test
centers and laboratories also.
(c) Responsibilities of persons operating Quarantine Camps/Homes or Home-Care facilities*
Less quantity of biomedical waste is expected from quarantine Camps / Quarantine Home/ Home-
care facilities. However, the persons responsible for operating quarantine camps/centers/home-care
for suspected COVID-19 persons need to follow the below mentioned steps to ensure safe handling
and disposal of waste;
- General solid waste (household waste) generated from quarantine centers or camps should be
handed over to waste collector identified by Urban Local Bodies or as per the prevailing local
method of disposing general solid waste.
- Biomedical waste if any generated from quarantine centers/camps should be collected
separately in yellow colored bags (suitable for biomedical waste collection) provided by ULBs.
These bags can be placed in separate and dedicated dust-bins of appropriate size.
- Persons operating Quarantine camps/centers should call the CBWTF operator to collect
biomedical waste as and when it gets generated. Contact details of CBWTFs would be available
with Local Authorities.
- Persons taking care of quarantine home / Home-care should deposit biomedical waste if any
generated from suspected or recovered COVID-19 patients, by following any of the following
methods as may be arranged by ULBs;
- Hand over the yellow bags containing biomedical waste to authorized waste collectors at
door steps engaged by local bodies; or
- Deposit biomedical waste in yellow bags at designated deposition Centers established by
ULBs. The bag again be stored in yellow bag or container; or
- Handover the biomedical waste to waste collector engaged by CBWTF operator at the
doorstep.
Guidelines for Handling, Treatment, and Disposal of Waste Generated during
Treatment/Diagnosis/ Quarantine of COVID-19 Patients – Rev. 1
Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi
4 | P a g e
- Persons operating Quarantine camps/centers or Quarantine-homes/Home-care should report
to ULBs in case of any difficulty in getting the services for disposal of solid waste or biomedical
waste.
Clarifications:
- Quarantine Camps / Quarantine-Home / Home-care are the places where suspected people
or the contacts of suspected / confirmed cases who have been directed by authorised
hospitals or local authorities to stay at home for at least 14 days for observation for any
symptom of COVID-19, if any.
- Patients positive for COVID-19 will not be treated at Quarantine Camps / Quarantine-Home /
Home-care unless such situation is notified by the State/Central Governments.
- Biomedical waste at Quarantine Camps / Home-care will comprise of used syringes, date
expired or discarded medicines, used masks/gloves and in case of patients with other chronic
diseases may also include drain bags, urine bags, body fluid or blood soaked tissues/cotton,
empty ampules etc.
- Biomedical waste generated from Quarantine Camps / Quarantine-Home / Home-care would
be treated as ‘domestic hazardous waste’ as defined under Solid Waste Management Rules,
2016, and shall be disposed as per provisions under Biomedical Waste Management Rules,
2016 and these guidelines.
- General waste from Quarantine Camps / Quarantine-Home / Home-care shall be disposed as
Solid waste as per provisions under SWM Rules, 2016.
[*Amended in Rev. 1 of guidelines dated 24/03/2020]
(d) Duties of Common Biomedical Waste Treatment Facility (CBWTF):
- Report to SPCBs/PCCs about receiving of waste from COVID-19 isolation wards / Quarantine
Camps / Quarantined homes / COVID-19 Testing Centers;
- Operator of CBWTF shall ensure regular sanitization of workers involved in handling and
collection of biomedical waste;
- Workers shall be provided with adequate PPEs including three layer masks, splash proof
aprons/gowns, nitrile gloves, gum boots and safety goggles;
- Use dedicated vehicle to collect COVID-19 ward waste. It is not necessary to place separate label
on such vehicles;
- Vehicle should be sanitized with sodium hypochlorite or any appropriate chemical disinfectant
after every trip.
- COVID-19 waste should be disposed-off immediately upon receipt at facility.
- In case it is required to treat and dispose more quantity of biomedical waste generated from
COVID-19 treatment, CBWTF may operate their facilities for extra hours, by giving information
to SPCBs/PCCs.
- Operator of CBWTF shall maintain separate record for collection, treatment and disposal of
COVID-19 waste.
Guidelines for Handling, Treatment, and Disposal of Waste Generated during
Treatment/Diagnosis/ Quarantine of COVID-19 Patients – Rev. 1
Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi
5 | P a g e
- Do not allow any worker showing symptoms of illness to work at the facility. May provide
adequate leave to such workers and by protecting their salary.
(e) Duties of SPCBs/PCCs
- Shall maintain records of COVID-19 treatment wards / quarantine centers / quarantines homes
in respective States.
- Ensure proper collection and disposal of biomedical waste as per BMW Rules, 2016 and SoPS
given in this guidance document;
- Allow CBWTFs to operate for extra hours as per requirement;
- May not insist on authorisation of quarantine camps as such facilities does not qualify as health
facilities. However, may allow CBWTFs to collect biomedical waste as and when required;
- In case of States not having CBWTFs as well as rural or remote areas, not having access to
CBWTFs, the existing captive facilities of any hospital may be identified for disposal of COVID-
19 waste as per provisions under BMWM Rules, 2016 and these guidelines.
- Coordinate with CBWTFs and ULBs in establishing adequate collection and disposal of COVID-
19 waste.
- In case of generation of large volume of yellow color coded (incinerable) COVID-19 waste,
permit HW incinerators at existing TSDFs to incinerate the same by ensuring separate
arrangement for handling and waste feeding.
(f) Duties of Urban Local Bodies +
Urban Local Bodies are responsible for ensuring safe collection and disposal of biomedical waste, if
any, generated form Quarantine Camps/ Quarantine Homes/ Home Care for COVID-19 suspected
persons.
- Information on each Quarantine Camps/ Quarantine Homes/ Home-Care should be available
with local administration and provide updated list to SPCBs from time to time;
- In case of quarantine camps, ensure that biomedical waste is collected directly by CBWTFs
identified by ULB. Waste from quarantine camps to be lifted by CBWTFs on call basis as and
when the biomedical waste gets generated. Provide contact details of CBWTF operator at
Quarantine Camps;
- Provide necessary support, security including authorisation to staff of CBWTFs;
- ULB shall engage CBWTF operator for ultimate disposal of biomedical waste collected from
quarantine home/home care or waste deposition centers or from door steps as may be required
depending on local situation; ULB shall make agreement with CBWTF in this regard.
- ULBs envisage following options to facilitate safe collection and disposal of biomedical waste
from quarantined homes/Home care;
a) Engage authorized waste collectors for door steps collection of biomedical waste and
transfer to collection points for further pick-up by CBWTF; and/or
b) In case number of quarantined homes/Home-care units are less, ULBs may engage
services of CBWTFs to collect the waste directly from door-steps.
Guidelines for Handling, Treatment, and Disposal of Waste Generated during
Treatment/Diagnosis/ Quarantine of COVID-19 Patients – Rev. 1
Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi
6 | P a g e
- Provide yellow colored bags (designated for BMW) to the persons responsible for operating
Quarantine Camp or home-care. If required, such bags may be provided through CBWTF.
- ULBs shall ensure the following in engaging authorized waste collectors at door-steps or at
waste deposition centers;
o Create a separate team of workers who shall be engaged in door step waste collection at
waste deposition centres or at quarantine homes or home care.
o Ensure that only designated staff collects biomedical waste from quarantine homes or
home care.
o Training should be provided for sanitization, about collection of biomedical waste,
precautionary measures to handle biomedical waste.
o Impart training to waste collector in handling of biomedical waste including methods of
sanitization. Training to waste collectors should be arranged through CBWTF operators;
o The staff involved in handling and collection of waste from quarantine homes or home
care centers shall be provided with adequate Personnel Protective Equipment such as
three layer masks, splash proof aprons/gowns, heavy-duty gloves, gum boots and safety
goggles. These PPEs are required to be worn all the time while collecting of waste from
quarantine center/quarantine homes/home care/waste deposition centres.
o Use dedicated carts / trolleys / vehicles for transport of biomedical waste. Ensure
sanitization of vehicles with 1% hypochlorite after each trip.
o Ensure that, waste collectors arriving at quarantine center or at home care shall spray the
disinfectant (1% hypochlorite solution) on the bin used for yellow bag.
- Establish common waste deposition centers (as stipulated under SWM Rules, 2016) for
receiving / collection of biomedical waste. For this purpose, existing Dhalaos if any may be
converted suitably.
- The general solid waste collected from quarantine homes or home care shall be disposed off as
per SWM Rules, 2016.
- Services of Common Biomedical Waste Treatment & Disposal Facilities (CBWTFs) and staff
associated with CBWTFs for collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of biomedical
waste generated from hospitals including COVID-19 isolation wards, Quarantine Camps, etc.
may be considered an essential service as part of health infrastructure.
- Facilitate smooth operations of CBWTFs.
[+ Inserted in Rev. 1 of guidelines dated 24/03/2020]
***
