Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Scaling up our testing programmes
Department of Health and Social Care
Published 04 April 2020
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
2
Contents
Ministerial Foreword.............................................................................................................3
Testing matters....................................................................................................................5
Challenges...........................................................................................................................6
Scaling up our testing programmes .....................................................................................8
Pillar 1: NHS swab testing for those with a medical need and the most critical key
workers.............................................................................................................................8
Pillar 2: Commercial-swab testing for critical key workers in the NHS, social care and
other sectors...................................................................................................................10
Pillar 3: Antibody testing to help determine if people have immunity to coronavirus.......11
Pillar 4: Surveillance testing to learn more about the disease and help develop new tests
and treatments................................................................................................................12
Pillar 5: Diagnostics National Effort to build a mass-testing capacity at a completely new
scale...............................................................................................................................13
Next steps.......................................................................................................................14
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
3
Ministerial Foreword
One of the most challenging things about coronavirus is the uncertainty, not knowing who
has the infection or when it’s safe to return to normal life. Good quality testing can help
provide us with certainty. It’s a big part of how we’re going to defeat this disease.
Public Health England has already done world-beating work on testing, working with key
international partners to design and deliver the first UK COVID-19 diagnostic test, rolling it
out faster than any other novel UK test in recent history. We are ahead of most European
countries for testing at this point, and we have undertaken one of the highest number of
tests in Europe, after Italy, Spain and Germany. But our testing efforts face big challenges
that we now need to overcome. This strategy sets out how.
Here are the challenges. First, we are starting from a lower base. Unlike some countries,
we didn’t go into this crisis with a major diagnostics manufacturing industry to call on.
There is also huge international demand for crucial testing materials like kits, swabs and
chemical reagents.
Given that finite capacity, we’ve had to prioritise. I completely understand that NHS staff
want to get tested so they can return to the frontline as fast as possible. But early on I took
the decision that seriously ill patients had to come first. For them, a test can mean the
difference between life and death. My overriding goal is to protect life and I stand by that
decision.
We also have to ensure that any new test products are up to the job. Our experts are clear
that having no test is better than an unreliable test, and several of the tests we’ve already
checked have been too inaccurate to be used in this crisis. I will not send NHS staff back
onto the wards with the false comfort of a false negative result.
Our ultimate goal is that anyone who needs a test should have one. We will get there
through a phased approach, starting with patients who need the test, expanding to NHS
workers and their families as we are now doing, then other critical key workers as we ramp
up further, and then expanding to the wider community over time. Our testing strategy has
five pillars, which this document sets out in full.
The first pillar is boosting swab testing – testing to find out if you have the virus – by PHE
and NHS labs for patients and frontline workers in the NHS. We have already reached our
ambition of 10,000 tests per day by the end of March as we committed. We are now
committed to reaching 25,000 tests per day by the end of April at the latest.
The second pillar is the creation of brand-new swab testing capacity delivered by
commercial partners. Again, this is swab testing to tell if people have the virus. The biggest
part of this pillar is the partnership with universities, research institutes and companies
such as Amazon and Boots, to build a network of new labs and testing sites across the
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
4
UK. This new service has just launched and is ramping up rapidly. We are also working
with other testing companies to expand Pillar 2 so that over time we have many different
commercial companies delivering mass swab testing.
The third pillar is antibody tests, which are designed to detect if people have had the virus
and are now immune. These could potentially be done at home with a finger prick and
deliver results in as little as twenty minutes. We are currently working with several
companies who are offering these tests and are evaluating their effectiveness. Antibody
tests offer the hope that people who think they have had the disease will know they are
immune and get back to life as normal. But crucially, they have to be proven to work.
The fourth pillar is surveillance. We are conducting some of the biggest surveys in the
world to find out what proportion of the population have already had the virus. This is done
using a high accuracy antibody test operated by Public Health England at their Porton
Down science campus. We will use these tests to help strengthen our scientific
understanding and inform us all on the big choices we have to make about social
distancing measures and how we exit from this crisis.
The fifth pillar is the most ambitious. We want to build in a short space of time, the large
diagnostics industry that this country currently lacks. Just as our top end manufacturers
have joined the national effort to build ventilators, so our life sciences companies will do
the same for testing. UK pharmaceutical giants which don’t have a tradition of diagnostics,
are now working with our world leading but smaller diagnostics companies, to build a
British diagnostics industry at scale. This new national effort for testing will ensure we can
get tests for everyone who needs them.
Taken together, I’m setting the challenge across all five pillars, of 100,000 tests per day,
by the end of April. To drive this forward, I’m delighted that Professor John Newton will be
taking on a new role to co-ordinate this national effort for testing.
These five pillars represent a comprehensive strategy to put in place the testing that is
mission critical as we fight this battle against COVID-19.
There will be problems, like those that we have already overcome. There will be bumps in
the road and criticisms made – some justified. But we have some of the best minds and
science in the world at our disposal and, having recovered from the illness myself, I am
more determined than ever to take the fight to this disease.
Matt Hancock
Secretary of State for Health and Social Care
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
5
Testing matters
1.1 Testing is a key pillar of our strategy to protect the NHS and save lives. We are
focused on two types of tests: 'swab tests' for people with symptoms to see if they
have coronavirus; and 'antibody tests', which test for the presence of antibodies
that will demonstrate whether you have had the disease.
1.2 The Government is committed to mass testing: our overall ambition is to provide
enough swab tests for everyone that needs one. In the 'contain' stage, our focus
was on testing to support contact tracing and investigating outbreaks. At present,
whilst we seek to 'delay' the spread of the virus through social distancing, this
means:
(a) continuing to provide tests for patients who need them; and
(b) providing tests for NHS, social care and then wider critical key workers and
their families who are in self or household isolation, to support them to return to
work as soon as possible, if they are well enough to do so.
1.3 We are working with partners to expand swab testing to critical NHS and social
care staff and their families (details below under Pillar 2), so they can stay in work
if they test negative and keep themselves and others safe if they test positive.
Once widespread testing is available, we will test critical key workers regularly, to
keep them safe and ensure they do not spread the virus. Over time, we hope to
make testing available not just to NHS staff, and other critical key workers, but
ultimately to the whole population, as needed. Should antibody tests prove to be
effective, our strategy will then evolve to also help identify those who have had the
disease.
The Government is setting the challenge to itself and to the whole system - industry,
academia, the NHS - to immediately scale up our testing levels to 100,000 tests a day
from all five pillars of the strategy, across the UK by the end of this month.
This is a huge ambition. Currently, we are delivering around 10,000 swab tests per day.
And we will continue to scale up our ambition beyond this to 250,000 tests a day from all
five pillars.
We will work collaboratively with each nation, allocating targets and tests to meet their
specific needs.
1.4 This is an evolving document that will develop as we learn more about the virus,
and as we progress the work under the five pillars, set out below.
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
6
Challenges
1.5 Accuracy and reliability of tests: as with everything we are doing to tackle
coronavirus, we need to be led by the science. An unreliable test is worse than no
test. We need to ensure that all the tests we use are validated, reliable and
provide an accurate result. We also need to understand the quality of new tests
such as the antibody test before we start using them in order to avoid putting
people at risk by suggesting they are no longer susceptible to coronavirus. We are
working with a number of companies to evaluate tests and this validation is
ongoing - but the science is new and uncertain. This shows the importance of
having a rigorous process in place and checking every step for accuracy and
reliability.
1.6 Getting the right supply of people, lab space, equipment and chemicals:
specialist labs are needed to analyse each sample with the right diagnostic
machines and skilled professionals. We are fortunate to have a significant number
of these highly specialised machines (extraction and PCR) across the country
(over 500 in NHS labs alone, nearly 100 more in Public Health England labs, and
more available through universities and research institutes). The challenge is the
global shortage of materials needed to run the end-to-end testing process at full
capacity, particularly the reagents that help to ensure high levels of sensitivity and
specificity for these tests, the swabs with which they have been validated, and the
challenge of matching specific materials to the different machines available. Most
of these high-tech testing platforms are 'closed', which means that these materials
can only be supplied by the same manufacturer as the machine. We are therefore
dependent on global manufacturers to very rapidly increase the quantity of their
specific reagents and kits. We are working in partnership with them to increase
supply of these proprietary reagents, maximising the UK's global allocation, and
creating a sustainable supply of these components, including setting up local
manufacturing bases here in the UK. Where possible, we are 'opening up' the
closed platforms to make use of alternate suppliers of suitable reagents.
Where we have open platforms, we are rapidly expanding local supplies of
components and identifying innovative alternatives. Making use of our world-class
research institutes here in the UK, we have been developing alternatives to
traditional methods, trying to overcome rate-limiting steps like RNA-extractions.
We are also rapidly investigating how to bring on board the capacity and skills
available to us in universities, research institutes and private labs, particularly
where their platforms are open, working through the consequent implications for
patient data using emerging models of success (such as the Crick Institute).
Labs across the country are prepared to scale up testing. Some have already
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
7
deployed specialist staff on shifts covering seven days a week, twenty-four hours a
day, working in partnership with local universities and across departments; others
are ready and waiting to do so as soon as their supply of reagents and other
materials matches their capacity.
1.7 Logistics: with a highly contagious virus it is important to put in place robust plans
for safe access to testing facilities, storage and transportation of diagnostic swabs.
We want everyone who is tested to find out their results as quickly as possible. We
will continue to harness traditional logistical capabilities, including assistance from
the military, alongside new digital solutions, for example to issue kits and
communicate results, whilst providing people with clear information about what is
happening throughout the process.
The international context
Testing rates differ across countries depending on what stage the infection is at, how it is
spreading and existing testing capacity.
Other countries are also aiming to conduct 100,000 tests per day - Germany by mid-April,
the UK by the end of April and France by the end of June.
We have undertaken one of the highest number of tests in Europe behind Italy, Spain and
Germany. But we want to go further. Other countries such as South Korea and Germany,
have higher testing rates than the UK and we can learn from how they have achieved
these goals. For example, Germany has been able to take advantage of the existing
technology and infrastructure in its large diagnostics industry, with over 100 cutting edge
testing labs.
The UK is a world leader in life sciences, and we can harness this capacity to help us scale
up rapidly. We have seen many examples of innovative UK companies offering their
support to tackle this crisis, both to move into diagnostics and to scale up testing capacity.
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
8
Scaling up our testing programmes
1.8 The Government is working with the best minds in science, industry and logistics
across the world to scale up our testing capacity. Our strategy has five pillars:
Pillar 1: Scaling up NHS swab testing for those with a
medical need and, where possible, the most critical key
workers
1.9 This type of testing allows the NHS to identify and effectively care for those who
are most seriously ill – saving lives by helping clinicians decide the most effective
treatment options. These swab tests are largely delivered through Public Health
England's regional laboratory network and, since the beginning of March, NHS
laboratories across the country.
1.10 Since the crisis began, we have conducted around 200,000 tests across the UK
and over the last fortnight the number of tests done by Public Health England and
the NHS has doubled from 5,000 a day to 10,000 a day, by scaling up our lab
capacity, boosted by additional trained staff and securing improved access to key
supplies, consumables and staff. This puts us ahead of most other European
countries at this stage of the outbreak.
1.11 But we need to go further, as fast as possible. Public Health England and NHS
England / Improvement are committed to increasing their capacity to 25,000 swab
tests per day by the end of April, including through a public/private partnership with
Roche to bring on line new testing capability that uses their high-throughput real-
time PCR machines. The first partnership went live last weekend, based primarily
in the NHS, with more sites coming on stream each week during the course of
April. We also want to see the UK getting its fair share of proprietary test kits to
deliver the full capability that we are making available. The first call on these will
be for this pillar.
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
9
Figure 1 - Public Health England /Roche Partnership: COVID-19 High-throughput,
Real-Time PCR automated testing sites - update as of 2 April 2020
Source: Public Health England (2020)
1.12 In line with our strategy, the majority of this testing has been for those with a
medical need - for example, identifying coronavirus sufferers amongst the most
unwell people in hospital to allow clinicians to separate them from other vulnerable
patients and provide the best possible clinical care; or for investigating specific
outbreaks.
1.13 Within these numbers, some critical NHS key workers in these hospitals have
already been tested for COVID-19, where there has been spare capacity based on
the decision of local Trusts. As capacity increases, it is now possible to also ramp
up the volume of critical staff testing. This week, as NHS Trusts had created
further additional capacity, NHS England instructed that any spare capacity can be
focused on testing critical key workers, prioritising those who are in household
quarantine because a member of their household is symptomatic, allowing them to
return to work as soon as possible if the test is negative.
1.14 Further details on swab testing NHS staff - and other critical key workers - is set
out in the next pillar, which will add to our capacity in this area of testing.
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
10
Pillar 2: Mass-swab testing for critical key workers in the
NHS, social care and other sectors
1.15 As of 4th April, nearly 4,500 NHS workers have been tested in the pilot stage
across five new testing sites. Over the coming weeks and months, we want to
increase the scale of testing at much greater rates – to reach thousands more
health and care staff – and to also cover critical key workers in other sectors. We
will confirm the exact list as soon as possible. This will allow us to release more
staff, who are well enough to work but currently self or household isolating, back to
the frontline, boosting capacity at a time when public services are under pressure.
1.16 To help deliver this expansion in testing, last month we began a partnership with
universities, research institutes and companies such as Amazon and Boots to
create a mass testing infrastructure in the UK through the creation of a network of
new labs and testing sites across the UK.
1.17 New testing laboratories have been set up in Milton Keynes, Alderley Park and
Glasgow using Thermo Fisher Scientific test machines loaned by universities
across the country and public sector research establishments, such as The
Pirbright Institute. Industry are also actively helping to establish these laboratories
and we are working with Boots and other partners to set-up over 50 regional test
centres around the country by the end of April, starting in some of the main
hotspots of the virus, such as London and the Midlands. And we are urgently
working on standing-up a home-testing service for critical key workers, supported
by Amazon's logistics network and other commercial partners.
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
11
1.18 As part of this national effort, we have also partnered with Randox in Northern
Ireland, to establish a major laboratory in the Province to strengthen the UK-wide
testing capacity for health and care staff and other critical key workers. Randox
have also led in the development and production of sample self-collection kits,
distributed through Amazon, to enable testing of critical key workers throughout
the UK whilst they remain at home. Randox will roll out this service during April.
1.19 We are already working in many partnerships to maximise testing capacity and are
keen to explore all options including:
(a) Encouraging innovators that are producing promising new types of tests.
Examples include DNANudge that has been used at Imperial and Samba at
Addenbrookes, which provide fast turnaround point-of-care testing.
(b) Working with universities and with Universities UK. For example, through the
creation of a new online portal, supported by Reed employment. This has
been launched and allows university staff with laboratory skills to volunteer to
assist with the testing programme. Some specialist labs in universities are
already supporting the validation of new consumables and tests and providing
lab technicians, equipment and consumables (for example reagents) to the
programme. We will be working with Universities UK and others to provide
further guidance on how our university sector can help the mass testing effort.
(c) Working with colleagues at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs (DEFRA), who are already supporting the COVID-19 testing
programme and have provided specialist laboratory equipment (PCR and
robots) and expert personnel to support Public Health England and
government labs. In addition, DEFRA and other scientists, and Department of
Health and Social Care colleagues, are committed to working together to
agree how best to use the remaining capacity of three major animal testing
labs to further support this pillar of the testing effort (the Animal and Plant
Health Agency, Fera Science, The Pirbright Institute).
Pillar 3: Mass-antibody testing to help determine if people
have immunity to coronavirus
1.20 Antibody tests could tell people whether they have had the virus and are now
immune. Such tests are done by taking a blood sample and looking for the
presence of the right COVID-19 antibodies. Once proven in a laboratory setting,
this testing could potentially be done at home with a finger prick and deliver rapid
results - maybe in as little as twenty minutes.
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
12
1.21 These antibody tests are brand new. In fact, they are still being developed and
there is not yet one that has been proven to work as we would require. No
government in the world has yet rolled out a full COVID-19 antibody testing
programme.
1.22 We are currently engaged with several companies and are urgently testing the
quality, accuracy and effectiveness of potential tests with scientific experts and
regulators. We have bought some antibody testing kit stock on the basis of
minimum initial volumes to enable clinical testing. If the outcome of this is that the
antibody tests do not work, no further tests will be purchased and, where possible,
orders will be cancelled.
1.23 Our experts are clear that an unreliable test is worse than no test. We need to be
led by the evidence. Hence, the Chief Medical Officer discourages in the strongest
terms organisations from buying their own unvalidated antibody tests.
1.24 Should our clinical testing prove successful, we hope to deploy antibody testing
kits in their millions. In time, and subject to clinical advice, they could even be used
to inform the use of social distancing measures in the future. However, this is
some way off. In the meantime, we will keep the public updated on progress.
Pillar 4: Surveillance testing to learn more about the disease
and help develop new tests and treatments
1.25 Robust population surveillance programmes are essential to understand the rate
of infection, and how the virus is spreading across the country. They help us to
assess the impact of measures taken so far to contain the virus, to inform current
and future actions, and to develop new tests and treatments.
1.26 Since the end of February, we have established a national surveillance
programme for population blood testing, using a high accuracy antibody test
operated by Public Health England at Porton Down, to find out what proportion of
the population have had the virus.
1.27 Public Health England is testing samples of the population and is in the process of
analysing the first 800 samples collected. We are expanding this programme
during April so that we have the potential to test around 5,000 samples per week.
1.28 We will also roll out a national mass population sample over the coming months.
Participants will be invited to take part in a study involving at-home immunity
testing every 4 weeks over a 6 to 12-month period. The aim is to enrol 16,000 to
20,000 people who will undergo repeat testing. This will add to the population
data, as well as telling us about immunity and how long it lasts.
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
13
Pillar 5: Spearheading a Diagnostics National Effort to build a
mass-testing capacity at a completely new scale
1.29 Britain has an innovative, but relatively small diagnostics industry. We now need to
grow it, substantially and quickly. We are calling on all British life science
companies to turn their resources to creating and rolling out mass testing at scale.
In the short-term, this will help meet the supply outlined in the other strands in this
strategy, and then help us develop resilient, diagnostic capability in the UK
capable of meeting the testing demands over the coming months and years.
1.30 We are therefore asking industry to work with us on how this can best be
achieved. We want proposals for new national industrial capability that meets a set
of clear principles.
(a) It must be flexible, able to quickly adapt both the tests themselves and the
delivery of those tests as the virus and our response evolves over time. We
want to explore increasingly decentralised models of testing, moving away
from central labs to testing in local hospitals, at work or in the home.
(b) The solutions must enable testing at huge scale, but with extremely high levels
of accuracy and sensitivity. An unreliable test is worse than no test.
(c) It needs to be resilient - the end to end supply chain for the test should be
domestically based as far as practically possible, with a clear and deliverable
plan for the capacity and capability to deliver the scale of testing we need.
(d) It must be as open source as possible with the ability for components,
consumables, chemicals and digital components to be produced by a range of
manufacturers - quickly and easily. And it should be clear how new companies
can join and contribute to the approach.
1.31 We have already asked industry to tell us if they can manufacture testing
equipment or consumables; or if they have new or existing complete tests. We are
particularly focused on local manufacturers who can offer reagents and other
consumables - and these offers will be prioritised. We will continue to issue calls
over the coming days and weeks - these will be asks on specific areas where we
need current capability to be ramped up. We will also issue more detail on how we
are working with industry to grow our national diagnostic industry.
1.32 We are already working with our multinational companies; small, innovative
manufacturers; and industry bodies. Over the coming days, we will ramp up this
engagement further, working with many others to develop this national effort.
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
14
Next steps
1.33 This is an evolving strategy to put in place the testing we need to fight this battle
against COVID-19:
• Firstly, from this week the NHS will be using all their spare capacity to test critical
key workers at the frontline of health and care;
• Secondly, we will complete the pilot of our new commercial swab testing
programme and are aiming to offer tens of thousands of swab tests per day by the
end of April;
• Thirdly, in early April, we will complete our evaluation of the antibody test kits we
are working with and share the results; committing to further develop any
promising tests for clinical and then potential home use;
• Fourthly, over April we will continue our programme to survey the population, to
learn more about this virus so we can develop new tests and treatments and,
hopefully, vaccines; and
• Finally, we are going to continue rapidly building a diagnostics industrial strategy
that will develop our manufacturing capabilities, to secure the stable supply of the
tests, equipment and consumables we need for mass-testing at scale over the
immediate and medium term.
COVID-19 - Scaling up our testing programmes
15
© Crown copyright 2020
Published to GOV.UK in pdf format only.
Covid-19 Testing Programme
www.gov.uk/dhsc
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
