Addressing Social Stigma Associated with COVID-19
Public health emergencies during outbreak of communicable diseases
may cause fear and anxiety leading to prejudices against people and
communities, social isolation and stigma. Such behavior may culminate into
increased hostility, chaos and unnecessary social disruptions.
Cases have been reported of people affected with COVID-19 as well as
healthcare workers, sanitary workers and police, who are in the frontline for
management of the outbreak, facing discrimination on account of heightened
fear and misinformation about infection. Even those who have recovered from
COVID-19 face such discrimination. Further, certain communities and areas
are being labeled purely based on false reports floating in social media and
elsewhere.
There is an urgent need to counter such prejudices and to rise as a
community that is empowered with health literacy and responds appropriately
in the face of this adversity.
In this regard, all responsible citizens are advised to understand that:
• Although COVID-19 is a highly contagious disease which spreads fast and
can infect any one of us, we can protect ourselves through social
distancing, washing our hands regularly and following sneezing / coughing
etiquettes.
• Despite all precautions, if anybody catches the infection, it is not their fault.
In situation of distress, the patient and the family need support and
cooperation. It must be noted that the condition is curable and most
people recover from it.
• Healthcare workers including doctors, nurses, and allied & healthcare
professionals are rendering their services tirelessly to provide care and
medical / clinical support in this situation of crisis. Sanitary workers and
police are also doing selfless service and playing critical roles in addressing
the challenge of COVID-19. They all deserve our support, praise and
appreciation.
Dos
• Appreciate efforts of people providing
essential services and be supportive
towards them and their families.
• Share only the authentic information
available on the website of Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of
India or the World Health Organisation.
• Cross check any information related to
CoVID-19 from reliable sources before
forwarding any messages on social
media.
• Share positive stories of those who
have recovered from COVID-19.
Don’ts
• Never spread names or identity of
those affected or under quarantine or
their locality on the social media.
• Avoid spreading fear and panic.
• Do not target healthcare and sanitary
workers or police. They are there to
help you.
• Do not label any community or area for
spread of COVID-19.
• Avoid addressing those under
treatment as COVID victims. Address
them as ‘’people recovering from
COVID”.
• All those directly involved in the management of COVID-19 are equipped
with appropriate protective equipment to keep them safe from the
infection.
• Targeting essential services providers and their families will weaken our
fight against COVID-19 and can prove grievously detrimental for the entire
nation.
As responsible citizens, we must observe following Do’s and Don’ts:
