Guidance for organisations seeking
to support the COVID 19 Testing
Programme
Department of Health and Social Care
Contents
1. Who is this guidance aimed at? ....................................................................................2
2. How can organisations help the NHS?..........................................................................3
3. What criteria does a laboratory need to be able to meet in order to partner with a local
NHS trust to provide part or all of the testing pathway?.......................................................4
4. My laboratory fully meets these criteria to provide testing within the NHS – what form
can partnering with a local NHS take?.................................................................................6
5. My laboratory partially meets these criteria, or we have equipment and staff that could
be used in NHS laboratories – can we still help?.................................................................8
6. My laboratory or organisation partially or fully meets these criteria – what are my next
steps? ................................................................................................................................10
7. My laboratory doesn’t meet the criteria for fully or partially partnering with a local NHS
trust – can we still help?.....................................................................................................11
8. How will we communicate with laboratories and organisations going forwards?.........12
Annex A – the Francis Crick Institute.................................................................................13
Annex B – The Pirbright Institute .......................................................................................15
Annex C – Fera Science Ltd..............................................................................................16
Published 09 April 2020
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
2
1. Who is this guidance aimed at?
1.1 This guidance is for laboratories (usually without ISO 17025 or ISO 15189
accreditation) or organisations across the UK with available equipment based in:
• Universities;
• Research institutions; or
• other relevant industries/sectors
who are interested in supporting the NHS deliver the SARS-CoV-2 testing
programme.
1.2 These laboratories or organisations with available equipment may not specifically
be working on health-related applications.
1.3 In the first instance this will be focussed on harnessing the support that
laboratories can provide to the testing effort for NHS trusts and associated
pathology services, however we are urgently looking to expand this into other key
public sector fields such as Social Care, Prisons Service and Police Service.
1.4 This is UK-wide guidance. However, the Scottish Government, Welsh Assembly
and Northern Ireland Assembly may decide to take a different approach to
engaging with laboratories within their region.
1.5 Further details on the Covid-19 Testing Programme can be found at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-scaling-up-
testing-programmes
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
3
2. How can organisations help the
NHS?
The help that these organisations can provide to the NHS includes:
2.1 Direct help, by partnering with local NHS trusts to enhance their extraction, test
capacity and results generation or any element of this pathway; and/or
2.2 Indirect help, by supporting the NHS through:
(a) Providing specialist workers, such as PhD students, postdoctoral research
staff, laboratory technicians and assistants; and/or
(b) Sourcing, and providing critical items, such as RNA extraction and PCR
Capital Equipment, Machine Ancillaries, Laboratory Consumables, Laboratory
Reagents and Personal Protective Equipment (PPE); and/or
(c) Providing research capability to develop new assays or verification of test
results, alternatives to the currently available reagents and/or to the overall
testing pathway.
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
4
3. What criteria does a laboratory need
to be able to meet in order to partner
with a local NHS trust to provide part
or all of the testing pathway?
3.1 Laboratories will need to meet the following criteria:
• Sample reception area for accepting and logging samples adhering to national
infection control procedures
• Sample tracking capability (e.g. barcoding) for the end-to-end pathway
• Access to Category 3 compliant facilities or Category 2+ facilities that have been
risk assessed and confirmed by HSE, if handling clinical samples prior to viral
inactivation. Further information can be found here:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-guidance-
for-clinical-diagnostic-laboratories/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-handling-and-
processing-of-laboratory-specimens
• Automated RNA extraction equipment (validated by the NHS or Public Health
England) and access to a Real Time PCR assay machine using an assay
validated by the NHS or Public Health England:
https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-
content/uploads/sites/52/2020/03/guidance-and-sop-covid-19-virus-testing-in-nhs-
laboratories-v1.pdf
• Automated result analysis systems in line with national policy and working in
conjunction with the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) in place within the
partnering NHS pathology network
• Utilising equipment and test kits that are accredited by PNE/NHSE
• To avoid supply chain issues ideally you should have access to test kits and
reagents for RNA extraction and PCR that are not closed platform and from
different manufacturers to those used by the NHS
• Quality processes in place including validation and verification methodologies
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
5
• Specialist workforce available e.g. PhD students or Postdocs with relevant
experience that can work in rotas according to the needs of the NHS
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
6
4. My laboratory fully meets these
criteria to provide testing within the
NHS – what form can partnering with
a local NHS take?
4.1 The most appropriate partnership model for local NHS trusts and interested
laboratories/organisations will depend on a range of contextual factors and local
NHS needs. An agile approach centred around early engagement with the local
NHS trust/pathology network will be essential to success and help can be provided
to organisations from NHS England and the NHS Improvement testing programme
to ensure the appropriate laboratories within a network are connected.
4.2 The following organisations have already set up partnerships with local NHS trusts
to support the Testing Programme. Please review details of these exemplars and
work closely with your partner NHS trust to determine:
• Which model (if any) is most appropriate in your local context;
• How sustainable the work will be with regards to resources of reagents and
setup; and
• How it could be adapted to suit local needs, facilities and staffing.
4.3 Workforce upskilling to NHS requirements can be provided following an initial
competence assessment and with links to relevant e-based learning and other
modules.
Exemplar Description Further information
The Francis Crick
Institute
This is carrying out tests
on behalf of an NHS trust,
supported by locally
agreed data and sample
sharing processes and
working to agreed
Standard Operating
Procedures
Annex A
The Pirbright Institute This is providing a local
NHS trust with equipment
and staff to enhance their
Annex B
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
7
Exemplar Description Further information
testing capacity
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
8
5. My laboratory partially meets these
criteria, or we have equipment and
staff that could be used in NHS
laboratories – can we still help?
5.1 Yes – there are examples of organisations who partially meet these criteria who
are able to directly or indirectly support local NHS trusts in elements of the testing
pathway for example;
• by providing access to Category 3 facilities;
• by providing RNA extraction equipment or capability;
• by providing Real Time PCR platforms or performing this part of the pathway;
• by assisting the ongoing delivery of the NHS service by performing validation of
new assays; and/or
• by developing sustainable sources of regents.
5.2 The following are indicative of the type of partnerships currently in place:
Exemplar Description Further information
Fera
Science Ltd
Fera Science Ltd meet the
criteria above but there are
difficulties surrounding Fera
joining up with the NHS
reporting system. For now, they
are focussing on validating a
LAMP assay as an alternative
testing method to help
overcome global reagent
shortages but may move to
carrying out testing in the
future.
Further information can be found in
Annex C
Exeter
University
Exeter University is providing
equipment and expertise to
support the Royal Devon and
Exeter NHS Trust with its
Further information can be found via
the online link here
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
9
Exemplar Description Further information
testing capability.
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
10
6. My laboratory or organisation
partially or fully meets these criteria –
what are my next steps?
6.1 If your laboratory has existing relationships with a local NHS trust, you should
approach them to discuss what type of support you might be able to offer and
whether they would be interested in partnering with you.
6.2 If you do not have an existing relationship with a local NHS Trust, you should use
our online portal to:
• Register your interest in supporting a local NHS Trust; and
• Make clear what support you might be able to offer.
• Our online portal is here: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/help-the-government-
increase-coronavirus-covid-19-testing-capacity
6.3 We will review this and:
• Identify whether which (if any) local NHS Trusts may be in need of the type of
support that you can provide; and
• Put you in contact with them.
6.4 You will then be able to work directly with the local NHS trust about the best way
you can support them.
6.5 If you are not matched with a local NHS trust (for example, if they do not require
assistance), and are still interested in supporting the COVID-19 testing
programme, we recommend that you follow the steps under question 7.
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
11
7. My laboratory doesn’t meet the
criteria for fully or partially partnering
with a local NHS trust – can we still
help?
7.1 The NHS also needs help to supply materials and equipment; and supply
complete testing methods. Further information can be found here:
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/help-the-government-increase-coronavirus-covid-19-
testing-capacity
7.2 From time to time, the government may issue a call out for specialist workers,
such as PhD students, postdoctoral research staff, laboratory technicians and
assistants through relevant channels, for example, via Universities UK.
7.3 Workforce upskilling to NHS requirements for these specialist workers can be
provided following an initial competence assessment and with links to relevant e-
based learning and other modules.
7.4 Should the government approach your organisation about recruiting these types of
specialist workers, please make your staff aware and release them to support in
enhancing Covid-19 testing capacity in this way.
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
12
8. How will we communicate with
laboratories and organisations going
forwards?
8.1 We will share comms and updates to the following networks:
• NHS Pathology network
• Pathology Alliance
• Universities UK
• NHS Genomic Laboratory Hubs and British Society of Genomic Medicine
• Health related Industry partners including pharmaceutical companies
• PHE
• Other government departments i.e. DEFRA, OLS
• Broader industry partners
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
13
Annex A – the Francis Crick Institute
The Francis Crick Institute is a biomedical discovery institute dedicated to understanding
the fundamental biology underlying health and disease.
At the core of the Crick model is an Operations Team, consisting of the NHS trust
virologists (University College London Hospitals), the NHS trust diagnostic laboratory
(HSL), clinical scientists working at the both the NHS trust and the Crick, and Crick
scientists and leaders. The approach was developed from the outset as a partnership with
the Crick considered as an extension of the accredited diagnostic partner laboratory
(HSL). All processes have been established at the Crick with close coordination with the
NHS trust diagnostic laboratory HSL. The SOPs, and the verification data sets for the
pipeline were approved by NHS trust staff and HSL laboratory staff before proceeding. The
pipeline was tested in parallel with the NHS diagnostic laboratory for validation. NHS trust
staff and HSL staff are part of the clinical diagnostic working group within the operations
team and oversee the quality and governance of the pipeline.
The Crick approach is based on five main work-streams, that were developed and tested
independently, and are therefore largely standalone. The approach relies on a highly
trained research staff to support a semi-automated, but not highly integrated, pathway.
The advantage is that the approach is agile and can make use of different lab-space
distributed across the building but, particularly with respect to sample reception/handling,
requires substantial teams working in shifts. The five steps in the Crick-COVID testing
pipeline are shown in the box below:
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
14
The end-end data pathway has been established by the NHS trust diagnostic lab (HSL) in
collaboration with the Crick scientific computing platforms, to enable sample registration
from WINPATH, and tracking throughout the process. Analysis of the RT-PCR data is
performed with a 1st pass (technical report of the run), followed by a 2nd level reporting
with accredited clinical scientists using a web portal (in conjunction with HSL), before
being exported to WINPATH, and verified and completed by the UCLH virology team. The
Crick COVID reporting pipeline is shown below:
With an adequate supply chain, numerous institutes/labs could carry out the PCR step,
and many could do the robotic non kit-dependent RNA extraction, but only a few could
process a significant number of samples/reception/curation/inactivation/exports using CL3
trained staff with suitable containment facilities.
For further information, please contact testing-response@crick.ac.uk
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
15
Annex B – The Pirbright Institute
The Pirbright Institute is a world leading centre of excellence in research and surveillance
of virus diseases of farm animals and viruses that spread from animals to humans.
The Institute is the world reference laboratory for many high consequence livestock
diseases, for example foot-and-mouth disease and has considerable experience of large-
scale testing of samples from disease epidemics, ISO/IEC17025 accredited. The institute
currently has no links with the NHS or PHE sample reception or reporting systems
• Despite the availability of high throughput diagnostic platforms at Pirbright, it was clear
linking to the NHS IT networks would not be straightforward. The quickest way to
increase capacity of the local NHS laboratory was to deploy equipment and reagents.
• Pirbright Kingfisher flex nucleic acid extraction system (Thermofisher) and ABI7500
Fast PCR machine (Thermofisher) were fumigated out of high containment, and
moved into the local NHS laboratory of the Berkshire and Surrey Pathology Service at
the Royal Surrey County Hospital
• Thermofisher technical support commissioned the equipment
• The Managing Director of Berkshire and Surrey Pathology Services expects to
increase the network’s testing capacity from 2000 tests per day to 3000 tests per day
• Pirbright will set up the COVID-19 PCR with alternative reagents, superscript express
Taq polymerase using their remaining Kingfisher flex nucleic acid extraction system
and ABI7500 Fast PCR machine and transfer the protocol to Royal Surrey County
Hospital
• Additional testing of other reagents can be carried out at Pirbright and transferred to
Berkshire and Surrey Pathology Services as required. These protocols can be shared
more widely with NHS laboratories
• Pirbright to provide available consumables, extraction kits and reagents (for the above)
required to perform 15,000 tests
• This should help solve some of the reagent supply problems and keep the front-line
instruments running for diagnostic tests
• Pirbright will provide Berkshire and Surrey Pathology Services with training and
technical assistance and/or staff if required on rotation
For further information, please contact Carrie Batten at carrie.batten@pirbright.ac.uk
and/or Valerie Mioulet at valerie.mioulet@pirbright.ac.uk
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
16
Annex C – Fera Science Ltd
RNA based detection of COVID-19
COVID-19 detection from virus RNA is conducted in three methodological steps: RNA
extraction, amplification, and detection of amplification (which confirms the presence of
SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the sample).
Real time PCR
Within the current real time PCR protocols, the extraction step has to produce good quality
RNA which is relatively free of inhibitors (generally kit-based extraction with multiple
steps).
The amplification step is via PCR using PCR reagents, primers and fluorescent labelled
probes, with the reactions taking place on a thermocycling instrument over around 1 -1.5
hours.
Detection of the fluorescence emitted by the fluorescent probe during amplification is
performed within the real time PCR instrument, which confirms the positive/ negative/
inconclusive result.
LAMP (Loop-mediated isothermal amplification)
LAMP is an alternative chemistry / reaction to PCR. Within a typical protocol, the extraction
step is basic and fast (e.g. shaking, heat the sample within a buffer) as the LAMP assay is
more robust to inhibitors. The amplification uses LAMP reagents and primers, takes place
at 60ºC without the need for temperature cycling and is fast (typical reaction times 8-20
minutes).
Detection is by measurement of fluorescence emitted by a fluorescent dye during
amplification. The amplification/ detection steps can either be performed on real time PCR
instruments which are high throughput but lab based, or on instruments such as the
Optigene Genie II that are portable and low throughput; see
http://www.optigene.co.uk/instruments/instrument-genie-ii/.
LAMP assays exist which can be run on a hot block, and amplification is determined by a
visible dye colour change (transparent to blue). Sensitivity and robustness are theoretically
lower.
LAMP versus real time PCR:
• Similar technology to real time PCR with the same outputs
• Slightly lower sensitivity (likely not an issue)
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
17
• Simpler, quicker workflow as LAMP does not require a complex DNA extraction
step. This saves extraction reagents and kit.
The detection step is quicker (15-20 min versus 1- 1.5 hours)
• LAMP uses different reagent needs to existing real time method so eases supply
chain (although some key ingredients are the same)
Key points
• Fera uses LAMP in the lab as accredited and/ or validated tests for the detection of
plant pest and pathogens and has used LAMP on portable devices for in-field
detection in plant disease outbreaks.
• With the loan of high throughput KingFisher Flex extraction robots to support COVID-
19 swab testing, Fera no longer has any meaningful capacity to offer high throughput
COVID-19 testing using existing PHE real time PCR protocols.
• Using LAMP, Fera or other labs may be able to offer COVID-19 testing but the
methods and protocols are still under development and validation for this application.
• Access to appropriate samples is key to being able to validate the methods
• Two possible use cases for LAMP are;
(i) In-field: Low throughput but tried and tested by Fera in plant health
contingency scenarios. Limitations will be around validation, deployment of
the devices and training.
(ii) Within laboratories: High throughput. Benefits as described above (faster
protocol, possible better availability of reagents).
Can be carried out on existing real-time PCR machines for high
throughput of samples (verification testing would be required). Could be
carried out at Fera
• Validation: Progress is being made by the Basingstoke NHS lab on protocols and
validation data for the assays and the crude extraction steps. An assumption is that
the samples can be heat inactivated, which allows them to be processed at CL2. We
understand that this was the case at the Basingstoke lab but, separately from PHE,
that heat inactivation is not proven.
For the method to be usable, it needs to be possible to work with it in CL2.
For further information, please contact Andrew Swift at Andrew.Swift@capita.com
and/or Paul.Robb@fera.co.uk
COVID-19 Testing Programme Guidance: Version 1.0
This guidance is under regular review and may be updated in future.
18
© Crown copyright 2020
Published to GOV.UK in pdf format only.
COVID-19 Testing Programme
www.gov.uk/dhsc
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
