Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19 transport data: methodology note
Published 15 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Coronavirus (COVID-19) transport data: methodology note
Department
for Transport
The Department for Transport provides daily updates to the Cabinet Office for use in the government’s daily media
briefings on changes in:
1. road traffic in Great Britain;
Contents
1. Road traffic
2. Rail passenger journeys
3. Rail station concourse footfall
4. Transport for London tube and bus routes
5. Non-TfL buses
Annex: data periodicity and baseline by mode
2. rail passenger journeys in the UK;
3. rail station concourse footfall at a set of monitored stations;
4. Transport for London’s (TfL) tube and bus routes; and
5. bus travel in Great Britain (excluding London)
The data is sent as near to real time as possible. This document sets out information on the data sources and
methodology used to generate each of these headline measures. To find the latest data, please see the slides and
datasets to accompany coronavirus press conferences.
Reminder on days of the week differences
Although daily data is being reported, direct comparisons of change should not be made between weekdays and
weekends/bank holidays. For public transport there are typically different levels of service/timetable in place on weekends
and bank holidays than on weekdays; and for road traffic, there is a different profile on weekend days compared to
weekdays.
1. Road traffic
Coverage
The National Road traffic estimates include change in traffic on all road types in Great Britain and all motor vehicle types
at GB level.
Data source
The analysis is based on around 275 automatic traffic count sites across Great Britain. These sites are used for DfT’s
Quarterly Road Traffic National Statistics series to estimate traffic change and as such the samples of automatic traffic
counters are stratified by area, road type, and traffic flow levels and have been designed to be representative of national
traffic.
Methodology
The daily road traffic estimates are suitable as an indication of traffic change rather than actual traffic volumes. The data
provided is indexed to the first week of February and the comparison is to the same day of the week, i.e., 100 would mean
that traffic is the same as the equivalent day in the first week of February. Over the course of the year, normal traffic can
vary by +/– 20%.”
Quality
In order to achieve a daily estimate of traffic change, lower levels of validation have been applied compared to normal
statistical outputs. However, the data series is being verified against other sources and similar trends have been seen.
Further statistics
More information about DfT’s statistics on road traffic can be found on ourRoad Traffic Statistics pages.
2. Rail passenger journeys
Coverage
Passenger journeys across the whole UK rail network.
Data source
Information on journeys comes from the Latest Earnings Networked Nationally Overnight (LENNON) data source.
LENNON is the revenue settlement service for the train operating companies for UK passenger rail ticket sales and is the
main source of data for UK rail fares revenue. The system processes information from the majority of UK train ticket sales,
it then allocates daily revenue to each of the train operators within 24 hours of the ticket being purchased.
Methodology
Data labelled ‘National Rail’ on the CCS graph is calculated by summing the number of journeys for the week-to-date for
2020 and expressing this as a percentage of the equivalent week in 2019.
The number of journeys is calculated from LENNON by taking the number of ticket sales on that day and uplifting each
sale by the number of likely journeys that would be taken with that ticket. For example: The purchase of an annual season
ticket would be counted as 480 journeys, and an advanced return would be counted as two journeys.
Quality
Whilst fit for purpose for monitoring overall change in usage trends, there are a few quality issues with the LENNON
journey data when using it for this purpose that should be borne in mind. These are mitigated to some extent by reporting
the 2020 data as a percentage of 2019 rather than reporting journey numbers themselves:
Data delay: The latest daily data covers ticket sales received up to the previous day, and generally includes 75–90% of
the eventual sales receipts that will be included for that day (which will also reflect adjustments such as refunds). Data
updates may therefore subsequently be made to previous days’ data from the start of each month. After 7 days the
data is about 95% complete for a given date. Therefore, we recommend looking at trends rather than interpreting the
exact figures.
Journeys using annual season tickets are allocated an uplift of around 480 journeys (the estimated use over the course
of the ticket’s validity, i.e., 240 return journeys) while a weekly ticket’s weighting is 10 journeys (5 return journeys). This
could be an over or underestimate of usage, especially in the current climate.
Journeys in LENNON are recorded based on the date of ticket sale, rather than the date of intended travel. There is
therefore a risk of overestimating the number of journeys for season tickets and advanced tickets on a given day.
LENNON does not cover some Passenger Transport Executives, local government bodies responsible for public
transport in their areas.
Daily passenger journey estimates and ticket sales are sensitive to occasional lump sum adjustments in LENNON. For
example, TfL issue zonal season tickets which allow travel on National Rail. Earnings from these journeys are passed
from TfL to train operating companies via LENNON. When these earnings are reported and dropped into LENNON, this
could look like a considerable change in journeys or sales on a given day. Again, this supports looking at rolling weekly
totals and comparing to the equivalent week in 2019.
Further statistics
More information about DfT’s rail passenger statistics can be found on ourRail Statistics pages.
3. Rail station concourse footfall
Coverage
Network Rail’s station footfall data covers 17 of the 20 Network Rail managed stations, including 8 central London termini.
This covers a very small proportion of the approximately 2,500 stations in Great Britain, though they are some of the
busiest stations in the country. Data is not currently collected at Clapham Junction, London Bridge and St Pancras
International. While footfall data for Guildford is being collected, it is currently excluded from the totals provided by DfT as
there is no comparable data from a year ago.
Data source
Footfall data is collected on a daily basis from a network of sensors that count how many people enter and exit the stations
for all purposes, including those who do not use the train services e.g. for shopping, food and drink, use of the
tube/taxis/buses, and people who are just passing through the station or waiting to meet others.
Methodology
As well as counting people entering and exiting the stations, the sensors count people using the stations’ retail facilities
separately (except at Guildford). This provides separate ‘concourse’ and ‘retail’ footfall counts, which allow us to see the
number of stations users who are also using retail facilities, i.e., the retail penetration for each station.
Quality
Data accuracy of the footfall counts is +/- 5%. Due to a lag in data processing from Network Rail’s Digital Footfall System,
there are often revisions made to the daily data back-series, e.g., to include new data from an individual station. This has
a minor impact on footfall totals for the following day, and by the following week the data is broadly finalised.
Further statistics
More information about rail station concourse footfall can be found onNetwork Rail’s information pages.
4. Transport for London tube and bus routes
Coverage
Transport for London bus and tube routes
Data source
Operational data from Transport for London
Methodology
Usage is measured by entry/exit data from tube stations and bus boarding taps. This is then compared to equivalent data
from 1 year ago and to other trends to gauge the extent to which travel has been reduced.
Quality
This is operational data considered fit for purpose for reporting changes in trends in usage
Further statistics
More information about TfL’s tube and bus routes can be found on ourLight Rail and Tram Statistics and Bus Statistics
pages.
5. Non-TfL buses
Coverage
Passenger boardings on around half of bus services in Great Britain outside London.
Data source
This data has been provided by Ticketer, based on operators which were using Ticketer in the January reference week
(3rd week of January). Data from other sources (including non-Ticketer operators) has been used to validate these figures
and is generally consistent with the trends presented.
Methodology
A figure of 100 means the same level as that seen on the same day in the third week of January. A figure higher than 100
shows an increase. A figure less than 100 shows a decrease.
Passenger boardings will include physical ticket sales, where money changes hands, as well as smart cards (commercial
or concessionary), QR tickets, and where the driver counts passengers (such as school runs).
As a measure of comparability to “business as usual”, data for Easter and other bank holidays has been adjusted to
compare against typical usage for those dates. This is because it is known that operators offer a different service level for
those dates when compared with the typical service levels for those days of the week.
Quality
This is operational data considered fit for purpose for reporting changes in trends in usage. It is not necessarily equivalent
to existing National Statistics on buses. Its precise comparability will only be truly known once National Statistics for the
period have also been collected and validated.
Further statistics
More information about non-TfL bus travel can be found on ourBus Statistics pages.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Annex: data periodicity and baseline by mode
Mode Periodicity Baseline
Roads Daily figure Equivalent day from first week of February 2020
Rail: passenger journeys Rolling weekly total for week ending today Equivalent week in 2019
Rail: station footfall Daily figure Equivalent day in 2019
Non-TfL bus Daily figure Equivalent day from third week of January 2020
TfL: tube and bus Daily figure Equivalent day in 2019
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
