Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance on social distancing for everyone in the
UK
Updated 30 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance on social distancing and for vulnerable people
Public Health
England
Background and scope of guidance
Contents
Background and scope of guidance
Getting assistance with foods and medicines if you are reducing social contacts
What should you do if you have hospital and GP appointments during this period?
What is the advice for visitors including those who are providing care for you?
What is the advice if I live with a vulnerable person?
Looking after your mental wellbeing
Summary of advice
This guidance is for everyone, including children. It advises on social distancing measures we should all be taking to
reduce social interaction between people in order to reduce the transmission of coronavirus (COVID-19). It is intended for
use in situations where people are living in their own homes, with or without additional support from friends, family and
carers. If you live in a residential care setting guidance is available.
We are advising those who are at increased risk of severe illness from coronavirus (COVID-19) to be particularly
stringent in following social distancing measures.
This group includes those who are:
aged 70 or older (regardless of medical conditions)
under 70 with an underlying health condition listed below (ie anyone instructed to get a flu jab as an adult each year on
medical grounds):
chronic (long-term) respiratory diseases, such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
emphysema or bronchitis
chronic heart disease, such as heart failure
chronic kidney disease
chronic liver disease, such as hepatitis
chronic neurological conditions, such as Parkinson’s disease, motor neurone disease, multiple sclerosis (MS), a
learning disability or cerebral palsy
diabetes
problems with your spleen – for example,sickle cell disease or if you have had your spleen removed
a weakened immune system as the result of conditions such asHIV and AIDS, or medicines such assteroid tablets
or chemotherapy
being seriously overweight (a body mass index (
BMI) of 40 or above)
those who are pregnant
Note: there are some clinical conditions which put people at even higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19. If you are in
this category, next week the NHS in England will directly contact you with advice about the more stringent measures you
should take in order to keep yourself and others safe. For now, you should rigorously follow the social distancing advice in
full, outlined below.
People falling into this group are those who may be at particular risk due to complex health problems such as:
people who have received an organ transplant and remain on ongoing immunosuppression medication
people with cancer who are undergoing active chemotherapy or radiotherapy
people with cancers of the blood or bone marrow such as leukaemia who are at any stage of treatment
people with severe chest conditions such as cystic fibrosis or severe asthma (requiring hospital admissions or courses
of steroid tablets)
people with severe diseases of body systems, such as severe kidney disease (dialysis)
What is social distancing?
Social distancing measures are steps you can take to reduce social interaction between people. This will help reduce the
transmission of coronavirus (COVID-19).
They are to:
1. Avoid contact with someone who is displaying symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19). These symptoms include high
temperature and/or new and continuous cough
2. Avoid non-essential use of public transport when possible
3. Work from home, where possible. Your employer should support you to do this. Please refer toemployer guidance for
more information
4. Avoid large and small gatherings in public spaces, noting that pubs, restaurants, leisure centres and similar venues are
currently shut as infections spread easily in closed spaces where people gather together.
5. Avoid gatherings with friends and family. Keep in touch using remote technology such as phone, internet, and social
media
6. Use telephone or online services to contact yourGP or other essential services
Everyone should be trying to follow these measures as much as is practicable.
We strongly advise you to follow the above measures as much as you can and to significantly limit your face-to-face
interaction with friends and family if possible, particularly if you:
are over 70
have an underlying health condition
are pregnant
This advice is likely to be in place for some weeks.
Handwashing and respiratory hygiene
There are general principles you can follow to help prevent the spread of respiratory viruses, including:
washing your hands more often - with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use a hand sanitiser when you get
home or into work, when you blow your nose, sneeze or cough, eat or handle food
avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands
avoid close contact with people who have symptoms
cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue, then throw the tissue in a bin and wash your hands
clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces in the home
What should you do if you develop symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19)
The same guidance applies to the general population and those at increased risk of severe illness form coronavirus
(COVID-19). If you develop symptoms of COVID-19 (high temperature and/or new and continuous cough), self-isolate at
home for 7 days. You can find the full guidance at stay at home.
Getting assistance with foods and medicines if you are reducing social
contacts
Ask family, friends and neighbours to support you and use online services. If this is not possible, then the public sector,
business, charities, and the general public are gearing up to help those advised to stay at home. It is important to speak to
others and ask them to help you to make arrangements for the delivery of food, medicines and essential services and
supplies, and look after your physical and mental health and wellbeing.
If you receive support from health and social care organisations, for example, if you have care provided for you through
the local authority or health care system, this will continue as normal. Your health or social care provider will be asked to
take additional precautions to make sure that you are protected. The advice for formal carers is included in the Home care
provision.
What should you do if you have hospital and GP appointments during this
period?
We advise everyone to access medical assistance remotely, wherever possible. However, if you have a scheduled
hospital or other medical appointment during this period, talk to your GP or clinician to ensure you continue to receive the
care you need and consider whether appointments can be postponed.
What is the advice for visitors including those who are providing care for
you?
You should contact your regular social visitors such as friends and family to let them know that you are reducing social
contacts and that they should not visit you during this time unless they are providing essential care for you. Essential care
includes things like help with washing, dressing or preparing meals.
If you receive regular health or social care from an organisation, either through your local authority or paid for by yourself,
inform your care providers that you are reducing social contacts and agree on a plan for continuing your care.
If you receive essential care from friends or family members, speak to your carers about extra precautions they can take
to keep you safe. You may find this guidance on Home care provision useful.
It is also a good idea to speak to your carers about what happens if one of them becomes unwell. If you need help with
care but you’re not sure who to contact, or if you do not have family or friends who can help you, you can contact your
local council who should be able to help you.
What is the advice if I live with a vulnerable person?
If you live in a house with a vulnerable person refer to ourhousehold guidance.
Looking after your mental wellbeing
Understandably, you may find that social distancing can be boring or frustrating. You may find your mood and feelings are
affected and you may feel low, worried or have problems sleeping and you might miss being outside with other people.
At times like these, it can be easy to fall into unhealthy patterns of behaviour which in turn can make you feel worse. There
are simple things you can do that may help, to stay mentally and physically active during this time such as:
look for ideas of exercises you can do at home on theNHS website
spend time doing things you enjoy – this might include reading, cooking, other indoor hobbies or listening to the radio or
watching TV programmes
try to eat healthy, well-balanced meals, drink enough water and try to avoid smoking, alcohol and drugs
keep your windows open to let in fresh air, get some natural sunlight if you can, or get outside into the garden
You can also go for a walk or exercise outdoors if you stay more than 2 metres from others.
It is important to look after your mental health and wellbeing. Further guidance is also available onsupporting children and
young people’s mental health and wellbeing.
What steps can you take to stay connected with family and friends during this time?
Draw on support you might have through your friends, family and other networks during this time. Try to stay in touch with
those around you over the phone, by post, or online. Let people know how you would like to stay in touch and build that
into your routine. This is also important in looking after your mental wellbeing and you may find it helpful to talk to them
about how you are feeling.
Remember it is OK to share your concerns with others you trust and in doing so you may end up providing support to them
too. Or you can use a NHS recommended helpline.
Advice for informal carers
If you are caring for someone who is vulnerable, there are some simple steps that you can take to protect them and to
reduce their risk at the current time.
Ensure you follow advice on good hygiene such as:
wash your hands on arrival and often, using soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitiser
cover your mouth and nose with a tissue or your sleeve (not your hands) when you cough or sneeze
put used tissues in the bin immediately and wash your hands afterwards
do not visit if you are unwell and make alternative arrangements for their care
provide information on who they should call if they feel unwell, how to useNHS 111 online coronavirus service and
leave the number for NHS 111 prominently displayed
find out about different sources of support that could be used and access further advice on creating a contingency plan
is available from Carers UK
look after your own wellbeing and physical health during this time. Further information is available in ourmental health
and wellbeing guidance
Summary of advice
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
* if one member of your family or household has a new continuous cough or high temperature
** if you live alone and you have a new continuous cough or high temperature
*** noting cinemas, theatres, pubs, bars, restaurants and clubs are now all required to close. If you meet others when
you are outdoors (for example, on a walk) ensure that you stay at least 2 metres away
**** for example via telephone or internet
1 such as anyone instructed to get a flu jab each year
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
