Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Reducing the risk of transmission of COVID-19 in the
hospital setting
Updated 4 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: infection prevention and control (IPC)
Public Health
England
Contents
1. Transmission based precautions
2. Duration of precautions
3. Patient placement - inpatient settings
4. Managing visitors
5. Moving and transferring patients
6. Critical care
7. Operating theatres (where these continue to be used for surgery)
8. Environmental decontamination
1. Transmission based precautions
Transmission based precautions (TBPs) are applied when standard infection control precautions (
SICPs) alone are
insufficient to prevent cross transmission of an infectious agent. TBPs are additional infection control precautions required
when caring for a patient with a known or suspected infectious agent.
TBPs are categorised by the route of transmission of the infectious agent:
Contact precautions: Used to prevent and control infection transmission via direct contact or indirectly from the
immediate care environment (including care equipment). This is the most common route of infection transmission.
Droplet precautions: Used to prevent and control infection transmission over short distances via droplets (>5μm) from
the respiratory tract of one individual directly onto a mucosal surface or conjunctivae of another individual. Droplets
penetrate the respiratory system to above the alveolar level. The maximum distance for cross transmission from droplets
has not been definitively determined, although a distance of approximately 2 metres (6 feet) around the infected individual
has frequently been reported in the medical literature as the area of risk. However, a precautionary approach is
recommended and close contact has been defined as within 2 metres (approximately 6 feet) of a patient.
Airborne precautions: Used to prevent and control infection transmission without necessarily having close contact via
aerosols (≤5μm) from the respiratory tract of one individual directly onto a mucosal surface or conjunctivae of another
individual. Aerosols penetrate the respiratory system to the alveolar level. Interrupting transmission of COVID-19 requires
both droplet and contact precautions; if an aerosol generating procedure (AGP) is being undertaken then airborne
precautions are required in addition to contact precautions.
In addition to SICPs, droplet precautions should be used for patients known to be or possibly infected with COVID-19 in all
healthcare settings.
COVID-19 virus is expelled as droplets from the respiratory tract of an infected individual (for example during coughing
and sneezing) directly onto a mucosal surface or conjunctiva of a susceptible individual(s) or environmental surface(s)
droplets travel only short distances through the air; a distance of at least 2 metres has been used for deploying droplet
precautions; however, this distance should be considered as the minimum rather than an absolute
2. Duration of precautions
For an individual patient, the duration that infection prevention and control precautions will need to be applied will depend
on several factors:
2.1 Hand hygiene
Hand hygiene is essential to reduce the transmission of infection in health and other care settings. All staff, patients and
visitors should decontaminate their hands with alcohol-based hand rub (ABHR) when entering and leaving areas where
patient care is being delivered.
Hand hygiene must be performed immediately before every episode of direct patient care and after any activity or contact
that potentially results in hands becoming contaminated, including the removal of personal protective equipment (PPE),
equipment decontamination and waste handling. Refer to 5 moments for hand hygiene
Before performing hand hygiene:
expose forearms (bare below the elbows)
remove all hand and wrist jewellery (a single, plain metal finger ring is permitted but should be removed (or moved up)
during hand hygiene)
ensure finger nails are clean, short and that artificial nails or nail products are not worn
cover all cuts or abrasions with a waterproof dressing
If wearing an apron rather than a gown (bare below the elbows), and it is known or possible that forearms have been
exposed to respiratory secretions (for example cough droplets) or other body fluids, hand washing should be extended to
9. Waste
10. Linen
11. Staff uniform
12. Management of equipment and the care environment
13. Environment
14. Handling dead bodies
include both forearms. Wash the forearms first and then wash the hands.
2.2 Respiratory and cough hygiene – ‘Catch it, bin it, kill it’
Patients, staff and visitors should be encouraged to minimise potential COVID-19 transmission through good respiratory
hygiene measures:
disposable, single-use tissues should be used to cover the nose and mouth when sneezing, coughing or wiping and
blowing the nose. Used tissues should be disposed of promptly in the nearest waste bin
tissues, waste bins (lined and foot operated) and hand hygiene facilities should be available for patients, visitors and
staff
hands should be cleaned (using soap and water if possible, otherwise usingABHR) after coughing, sneezing, using
tissues or after any contact with respiratory secretions and contaminated objects
encourage patients to keep hands away from the eyes, mouth and nose
some patients (such as the elderly and children) may need assistance with containment of respiratory secretions; those
who are immobile will need a container (for example a plastic bag) readily at hand for immediate disposal of tissues
2.3 Patient use of face masks
In common waiting areas or during transportation and where tolerable and appropriate in clinical areas, symptomatic
patients may wear a surgical face mask. The aim of this is to minimise the dispersal of respiratory secretions and reduce
environmental contamination. A surgical face mask should not be worn by patients if there is potential for their clinical care
to be compromised (such as when receiving oxygen therapy).
3. Patient placement - inpatient settings
3.1 Negative pressure isolation rooms
Special environmental controls, such as negative pressure isolation rooms, are not necessary to prevent the transmission
of COVID-19. However, in the early stages where capacity allows, and in high risk settings, patients with possible or
confirmed COVID-19 may be isolated in negative pressure rooms.
3.2 Single rooms
Wherever possible, patients with possible or confirmed COVID-19 should be placed in single rooms. Where
single/isolation rooms are in short supply, and cohorting is not yet considered possible (patient(s) awaiting laboratory
confirmation), prioritise patients who have excessive cough and sputum production for single/isolation room placement.
Single rooms in COVID-19 segregated areas should, wherever possible, be reserved for performing aerosol generating
procedures (AGPs).
Single rooms in non-COVID-19 areas should be reserved for patients requiring isolation for other (non-influenza-like
illness) reasons.
The prioritising of patients for isolation other than suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patients should be decided locally,
based on patient need and local resources.
3.3 Cohort areas
If a single/isolation room is not available, cohort possible or confirmed respiratory infected patients with other patients with
possible or confirmed COVID-19. Use privacy curtains between the beds to minimise opportunities for close contact.
Where possible, a designated self-contained area or wing of the healthcare facility should be used for the treatment and
care of patients with COVID-19. This area should:
include a reception area that is separate from the rest of the facility and should, if feasible, have a separate
entrance/exit from the rest of the building
not be used as a thoroughfare by other patients, visitors or staff, including patients being transferred, staff going for
meal breaks, and staff and visitors entering and exiting the building
be separated from non-segregated areas by closed doors
have signage displayed warning of the segregated area to control entry
Hospitals should consider creating cohort areas which differentiate the level of care required. It may also be prudent to
consider:
the need for cohorting in single/mixed sex wards/bays
underlying patient condition (immunocompromised)
age groups when cohorting children
routine childhood vaccination status when cohorting children
3.4 Staff cohorting
Assigning a dedicated team of staff to care for patients in isolation/cohort rooms/areas is an additional infection control
measure. This should be implemented whenever there are sufficient levels of staff available (so as not to have a negative
impact on non-affected patients’ care).
Staff who have had confirmed COVID-19 and recovered. should continue to follow the infection control precautions,
including personal protective equipment (PPE).
4. Managing visitors
Visitors to all areas of the healthcare facility should be restricted to essential visitors only, such as parents of paediatric
patients. Local risk assessment and practical management should be considered, ensuring this is a pragmatic and
proportionate response, including the consideration of whether there is a requirement for visitors to wear PPE.
Visiting may be suspended if considered appropriate. All visitors entering a segregated/cohort area must be instructed on
hand hygiene. They must not visit any other care area. Decisions to suspend or restrict visitors will depend on local
circumstances and risk assessment. Limiting entry points to a facility will help manage local restrictions.
Signage to support restrictions is critical. Visitors with COVID-19 symptoms must not enter the healthcare facility. Visitors
who are symptomatic should be encouraged to leave and must not be permitted to enter areas where there are extremely
vulnerable patients.
5. Moving and transferring patients
5.1 Moving patients within the same hospital
the movement and transport of patients from their single room/cohort area should be limited to essential purposes only.
Staff at the receiving destination must be informed that the patient has possible or confirmed COVID-19
if transport/movement is necessary, consider offering the patient a surgical face mask to be worn during transportation,
to minimise the dispersal of respiratory droplets when this can be tolerated and providing this does not compromise
clinical care
patients must be taken straight to and returned from clinical departments and must not wait in communal areas
if possible, patients should be placed at the end of clinical lists
5.2 Transfer from primary care/community settings
if transfer from a primary care facility or community setting to hospital is required, the ambulance service should be
informed of the infectious status of the patient
staff of the receiving ward/department should be notified in advance of any transfer and must be informed that the
patient has possible or confirmed COVID-19
5.3 Moving patients between different hospitals
Patient transfer from one healthcare facility may be undertaken if medically necessary for specialist care arising out of
complications or concurrent medical events (for example, cardiac angioplasty and renal dialysis). If transfer is essential,
the ambulance service and receiving hospital must be advised in advance of the infectious status of the patient.
6. Critical care
all respiratory equipment must be protected with a high efficiency filter (such as BS EN 13328-1). This filter must be
disposed of after use
disposable respiratory equipment should be used wherever possible. Re-usable equipment must, as a minimum, be
decontaminated in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
a closed suctioning system must be used
ventilator circuits should not be broken unless necessary
ventilators must be placed on standby when carrying out bagging
7. Operating theatres (where these continue to be used for surgery)
It is recommended that ventilation in both laminar flow and conventionally ventilated theatres should remain fully on during
surgical procedures where patients may have COVID-19 infection. Air can bypass filtration if a respirator is not fitted
perfectly or becomes displaced during use. Those closest to aerosol generation procedures are most at risk. The rapid
dilution of these aerosols by operating theatre ventilation will protect operating room staff. Air passing from operating
theatres to adjacent areas will be highly diluted and is not considered to be a risk.
theatres must be informed in advance of a patient transfer of a confirmed or possible COVID-19 positive case
the patient should be transported directly to the operating theatre and should wear a surgical mask if it can be tolerated
the patient should be anaesthetised and recovered in the theatre. Staff should wear protective clothing (seetable 1) but
only those within 2 metres of an aerosol generating procedure, such as performing intubation, need to wear FFP3
respirators, long sleeved gowns, gloves and eye protection. Considerations about the use of respiratory/anaesthetic
equipment are addressed in the critical care section above
instruments and devices should be decontaminated in the normal manner in accordance with manufacturers’ advice
both laryngoscope handle and blade should either be single use or reprocessed in the Sterile Supply Department.
Video laryngoscope blades should be single use and scope/handle decontaminated as per manufacture instructions.
the theatre should be cleaned as per local policy for infected cases, paying particular attention to hand contact points on
the anaesthetic machine
possible or confirmed cases of COVID-19 should be placed at the end of the list where feasible
For patients with possible or confirmed COVID-19, any of these potentially infectiousAGPs should only be carried out
when essential. Where possible, these procedures should be carried out in a single room with the doors shut. Only those
healthcare staff who are needed to undertake the procedure should be present. Once vacated by staff following an AGP,
leave the room for 5 minutes before cleaning.
8. Environmental decontamination
There is evidence for other coronaviruses of the potential for widespread contamination of patient rooms or environments,
so effective cleaning and decontamination is vital.
8.1 While the patient is in the room
Cleaning and decontamination should only be performed by staff trained in the use of the appropriate
PPE; in some
instances, this may need to be trained clinical staff rather than domestic staff, in which case, clinical staff may require
additional training on standards and order of cleaning.
After cleaning with neutral detergent, a chlorine-based disinfectant should be used, in the form of a solution at a minimum
strength of 1,000ppm available chlorine. If an alternative disinfectant is used within the organisation, the local infection
prevention and control team (IPCT) should be consulted on this to ensure that this is effective against enveloped viruses.
The main patient isolation room should be cleaned at least once a day. Body fluid spills should be decontaminated
promptly.
There should be more frequent cleaning and disinfection of commonly used hand-touched surfaces and of anteroom or
lobby areas (at least twice per day).
To ensure appropriate use of PPE and that an adequate level of cleaning is undertaken which is consistent with the
recommendations in this document, it is strongly recommended that cleaning of isolation areas is undertaken separately to
the cleaning of other clinical areas.
Dedicated or disposable equipment (such as mop heads, cloths) must be used for environmental decontamination.
Reusable equipment (such as mop handles, buckets) must be decontaminated after use with a chlorine-based disinfectant
as described above. Communal cleaning trollies should not enter the room.
8.2 Cleaning the room once the patient has been discharged or left the room
Clearance of aerosols is dependent on the ventilation and air change within the room. Once an end to dispersion can be
defined (such as the patient leaving the room), a single air change is estimated to remove 63% of airborne contaminants
and similarly with each subsequent air change. After 5 air changes, less than 1% of the original airborne contamination is
thought to remain.
In an isolation room with 10 to 12 air changes per hour (
ACH) a minimum of 30 minutes will reduce contamination to less
than 1%. In a side room with 6 ACH, one hour would be a pragmatic time, allowing for aerosols settling out as well as
being removed by ventilation.
Following transfer (recovery) and/or discharge of the patient, it is recommended that the room is left vacant with the door
closed for 20 minutes in a negative pressure isolation room or one hour for a neutral pressure room prior to performing a
terminal clean. Windows to the outside in neutral pressure rooms can be opened. If the room needs to be put back into
use urgently, then it is recommended that the room is cleaned as in section 8.1.
Before entering the room, perform hand hygiene then put on a disposable plastic apron and gloves. If a risk assessment
indicates that a higher level of contamination may be present or there is visible contamination with body fluids, then the
need for additional PPE such as a fluid resistant surgical mask, and eye protection should be considered.
collect all cleaning equipment and healthcare waste bags before entering the room
the person responsible for undertaking the cleaning with detergent and disinfectant should be trained in the process
remove all healthcare waste and any other disposable items
bedding and bed screens, treat as infectious linen. Do not shake linen and avoid all necessary agitation
patient care equipment should be cleaned according to manufacturer’s instructions, and where possible with chlorine-
based disinfectant, 70% alcohol or an alternative disinfectant used within the organisations that is effective against
enveloped viruses. Where it is not readily amenable to cleaning, such as blood pressure cuffs, it should be disposed of
to waste
clean all surfaces, beds and bathrooms with a neutral detergent, followed by a chlorine-based disinfectant, in the form
of a solution at a minimum strength of 1,000ppm available chlorine. If an alternative disinfectant is used within the
organisation, the local IPCT should be consulted on this to ensure that this is effective against enveloped viruses
dedicated or disposable equipment (such as mop heads, cloths) must be used for environmental decontamination and
disposed as clinical waste
reusable equipment (such as mop handles, buckets) must be decontaminated after use with a chlorine-based
disinfectant as described above
communal cleaning trollies should not enter the room
9. Waste
Large volumes of waste may be generated by frequent use ofPPE; advice from the local waste management team should
be sought prospectively on how to manage this.
Dispose of all waste as clinical waste.
Waste from a possible or a confirmed case must be disposed of as Category B waste. The transport of Category B waste
is described in Health Technical Memorandum 07-01: Safe management of healthcare waste
. Disposal of all waste related
to possible or confirmed cases should be classified as infectious clinical waste suitable for alternative treatment, unless the
waste has other properties that would require it to be incinerated.
10. Linen
No special procedures are required; linen is categorised as ‘used’ or ‘infectious’.
All linen used in the direct care of patients with possible and confirmed COVID-19 should be managed as ‘infectious’ linen.
Linen must be handled, transported and processed in a manner that prevents exposure to the skin and mucous
membranes of staff, contamination of their clothing and the environment:
disposable gloves and an apron should be worn when handling infectious linen
all linen should be handled inside the patient room/cohort area. A laundry receptacle should be available as close as
possible to the point of use for immediate linen deposit
When handling linen:
do not rinse, shake or sort linen on removal from beds/trolleys
do not place used/infectious linen on the floor or any other surfaces such as a locker/table top
do not re-handle used/infectious linen once bagged
do not overfill laundry receptacles
do not place inappropriate items, such as used equipment/needles, in the laundry receptacle
When managing infectious linen:
place directly into a water-soluble/alginate bag and secure
place the water-soluble bag inside a clear polythene bag and secure
place the polythene bag into in the appropriately coloured (as per local policy) linen bag (hamper)
All linen bags/receptacles must be tagged with ward/care area and date. Store all used/infectious linen in a designated,
safe, lockable area whilst awaiting uplift.
11. Staff uniform
The appropriate use of personal protective equipment (PPE) will protect staff uniform from contamination in most
circumstances. Healthcare facilities should provide changing rooms/areas where staff can change into uniforms on arrival
at work.
Organisations may consider the use of theatre scrubs for staff who do not usually wear a uniform but who are likely to
come into close contact with patients (for example, medical staff).
Healthcare laundry services should be used to launder staff uniforms. If there is no laundry facility available, then uniforms
should be transported home in a disposable plastic bag. This bag should be disposed of into the household waste stream.
Uniforms should be laundered:
separately from other household linen
in a load not more than half the machine capacity
at the maximum temperature the fabric can tolerate, then ironed or tumbled-dried
Note: It is best practice to change into and out of uniforms at work and not wear them when travelling; this is based on
public perception rather than evidence of an infection risk. This does not apply to community health workers who are
required to travel between patients in the same uniform.
12. Management of equipment and the care environment
Decontamination of equipment and the care environment must be performed using either:
a combined detergent/disinfectant solution at a dilution of 1,000 parts per million available chlorine (ppm available
chlorine (av.cl.)); or
a general purpose neutral detergent in a solution of warm water followed by a disinfectant solution of 1,000ppm av.cl
Only cleaning (detergent) and disinfectant products supplied by employers are to be used. Products must be prepared and
used according to the manufacturers’ instructions and recommended product ‘contact times’ must be followed. If
alternative cleaning agents/disinfectants are to be used, they should only on the advice of the IPCT and conform to EN
standard 14476 for virucidal activity.
12.1 Equipment
Patient care equipment should be single-use items if possible. Reusable (communal) non-invasive equipment should as
far as possible be allocated to the individual patient or cohort of patients.
Reusable (communal) non-invasive equipment must be decontaminated:
between each patient and after patient use
after blood and body fluid contamination
at regular intervals as part of equipment cleaning
An increased frequency of decontamination should be considered for reusable non-invasive care equipment when used in
isolation/cohort areas.
ventilators should be protected with a high efficiency filter, such as BS EN 13328-1
closed system suction should be used
Avoid the use of fans that re-circulate the air.
There is no need to use disposable plates or cutlery. Crockery and cutlery can be washed by hand or in a dishwasher
using household detergent and hand-hot water after use.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
13. Environment
Patient isolation rooms, cohort areas and clinical rooms must be decontaminated at least daily. Clinical rooms should also
be decontaminated after clinical sessions for patients with possible/known pandemic COVID-19.
In addition, patient isolation rooms must be terminally cleaned:
following resolution of symptoms, discharge or transfer (this includes removal and laundering of all curtains and bed
screens)
once vacated by staff following anAGP
Clearance of infectious particles after an AGP is dependent on the mechanical/natural ventilation andACH within the
room. A single air change is estimated to remove 63% of airborne contaminants; after 5 air changes, less than 1% of
airborne contamination is thought to remain.
In an isolation room with 10 to 12ACH a minimum of 20 minutes is considered pragmatic; in a side room with 6ACH this
would be approximately 1 hour. Advice should be sought from the local IPCT.
An increased frequency of decontamination should be incorporated into the environmental decontamination schedules for
areas where there may be higher environmental contamination rates:
toilets/commodes particularly if patients have diarrhoea
‘frequently touched’ surfaces such as medical equipment, door/toilet handles and locker tops, patient call bells, over
bed tables and bed rails should be cleaned at least twice daily and when known to be contaminated with secretions,
excretions or body fluids
Domestic/cleaning staff performing environmental decontamination should:
ideally be allocated to specific area(s) and not be moved between COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care areas
be trained in which personal protective equipment (
PPE) to use and the correct methods of wearing, removing and
disposing of PPE
The care environment should be kept clean and clutter free. All non-essential items including toys, books and magazines
should be removed from reception and waiting areas, consulting and treatment rooms, emergency departments, day
rooms and lounges. When made available, these items should not be shared. All toys must be cleanable and should be
cleaned regularly (preferably at the same time as the environment).
14. Handling dead bodies
The principles of SICPs and TBPs continue to apply whilst deceased individuals remain in the care environment. This is
due to the ongoing risk of infectious transmission via contact although the risk is usually lower than for living patients.
Where the deceased was known or possibly infected with COVID-19, there is no requirement for a body bag, and viewing,
hygienic preparations, post-mortem and embalming are all permitted.
Following a risk assessment of the potential post-mortem risk pathways,PHE has developed this advice in line with the
principles set out in the HSE guidance for droplet transmission risk as set out in:‘Managing infection risks when handling
the deceased: Guidance for the mortuary, post-mortem room and funeral premises, and during exhumation’
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
