Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: guidance for staff in the transport sector
Updated 27 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for staff in the transport sector
Department
for Transport
Public Health
England
Contents
What you need to know
Background
Symptoms
What to do if someone develops symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) in a transport setting
Travel arrangements
Cleaning and waste
Limiting spread in transport hubs
What you need to know
if someone becomes unwell while at a transport hub or on their journey with a new, continuous cough or a high
temperature, they must be sent home
passengers should wash their hands for 20 seconds before and after they have been on public transport and catch
coughs and sneezes in tissues
frequently clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are touched regularly, using your standard cleaning products
advise passengers they should not travel if they are feeling unwell with symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) - a new,
continuous cough or high temperature. This will also help to protect others from infection
use announcements in transport hubs to reinforce key messages, such as washing hands before and after travel, and
what to do if unwell
Background
This guidance will assist transport settings in addressing coronavirus (COVID-19).
This guidance may be updated in line with the changing situation.
Symptoms
The most common symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) are a new, continuous cough or a high temperature.
For most people, coronavirus (COVID-19) will be a mild infection.
What to do if someone develops symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) in a
transport setting
If anyone becomes unwell with the symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) in a transport setting they must be sent home
and advised to follow the stay at home guidance.
If they need clinical advice, they should go online toNHS 111 (or call 111 if they don’t have internet access). In an
emergency, call 999 if they are seriously ill or injured or their life is at risk. Do not visit the GP, pharmacy, urgent care
centre or a hospital.
If a member of staff or a passenger has helped someone who was taken unwell with symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-
19), they do not need to go home unless they develop symptoms themselves. They should wash their hands thoroughly
for 20 seconds after any contact with someone who is unwell.
It is not necessary to close the transport setting or send any staff home unless government policy changes. Keep
monitoring the website for the latest details.
Travel arrangements
Anyone who has symptoms should be advised to quickly and directly return home, to remain there and avoid contact with
other people. While using public transport, they should try to keep away from other people and catch coughs and sneezes
in a tissue.
This will prevent them from spreading the disease to family, friends and the wider community.
Cleaning and waste
You can find guidance on cleaning and waste disposal.
Limiting spread in transport hubs
Transport hubs should use posters and announcements to remind travellers and staff to wash their hands often and follow
general hygiene advice. Posters, leaflets and other materials available.
Handling baggage, post or freight
Arrivals into the UK
Toilet and shower facilities
Handling baggage, post or freight
There is no known increase in risk for handling baggage, post or freight from specified countries. Staff should continue to
follow existing risk assessments and safe systems of work.
Arrivals into the UK
Maritime
Maritime Declarations of Health are already required for all ships arriving from a foreign port. If the Maritime Declaration of
Health reports any instances of illness, the usual procedures for infectious diseases will be followed.
Aviation
All passengers will be provided with information leaflets on arrival in the UK.
All flights to the UK are required to:
provide health announcements to passengers relating to the current coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak
provide information to the relevant airport in line with standard operating procedure, and to the
PHE (Public Health
England) Health Control Unit at London Heathrow (LHR), in the event that there is a seriously unwell passenger
Performing body or bag searches
PHE recommends that passengers be asked if they have a new, continuous cough or a high temperature prior to the
search. PHE recommend that staff consider wearing gloves for each search and wash their hands as frequently as
possible.
Toilet and shower facilities
Current government advice is to stay at home and to not undertake non-essential travel. For those for whom travel is
essential, for example haulage and delivery drivers, use of facilities at motorway service stations is important. Toilet and
shower facilities can remain open subject to implementation of targeted or specific additional measures consistent with
current guidelines. As follows:
All individuals using the facilities should be reminded to:
wash their hands for 20 seconds, more frequently than usual, each day
catch coughs and sneezes in tissues or cover their mouth and nose with their sleeve (not hands), throw the tissue
away and wash their hands immediately
use hand sanitiser gel in addition to soap and water or on its own if soap and water are not available
View posters, leaflets and other materials
Social distancing between individuals should be practised for anyone using the facilities – with people staying a minimum
of 2 metres from each other, which in practice may mean that only one individual uses the facilities at any one time should
the size of the facility be insufficient to allow enough distance between users.
Cleaning an area with normal household disinfectant will reduce the risk of passing coronavirus (COVID-19) infection on to
other people, so regular cleaning of facilities such as showers and toilets should be implemented. Normal cleaning
frequencies will need to be increased depending on how often the facilities are used. For example, if there is a high level
of usage, the normal cleaning frequency should be doubled. This will need to be a local decision as cleaning frequencies
may vary throughout the day depending on the number of users of the facilities. Hard surfaces that are touched frequently
(for example door handles, grab rails) should also be cleaned more frequently in addition to standard cleaning protocols:
clean and disinfect regularly-touched objects and surfaces more often than usual using standard cleaning or household
disinfection products
follow the guidance on cleaning in non-healthcare settings
In the event of any individuals showing symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) – such as a new, continuous cough or a high
temperature – they should not use the facility and should be referred to the advice on the NHS website.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
