HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 22nd of March 2020, 188 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand
(MoPH), bringing the total number of cases to 599.
• The new cases announced today include 5 cases related to drinking
venue clusters (64 total cases to date) and 21 cases related to boxing
stadium clusters (105 total cases to date). These cases have included
boxers, trainers and audience members.
• Thirty-seven new cases are close contacts of other previously reported
cases. Two cases are related to attendance at a religious event in Malaysia, 15 cases are related to travel
or contact with travelers, and 108 cases are still under investigation. Many of these cases are young adults
living in Bangkok with mild symptoms, underscoring the critical importance of practicing social distancing.
• Of the 599 COVID-19 cases reported in Thailand, 44 have recovered, 553 are receiving treatment (7 cases
are severe) in healthcare settings and one has died.
• There is now a cumulative total of 10,343 Patients Under Investigation (PUIs) in Thailand since the COVID-
19 outbreak began, including 4,896 people being actively investigated or treated. This group includes people
being treated for other conditions who are no longer suspected of having COVID-19 infection.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
The Governors of Bangkok, five neighboring provinces and Chiang Mai have imposed urgent measures to
ensure social distancing, including closing a range of retail business until at least April 12th. People living in
these areas are requested to remain inside their homes and to limit all social contacts. The MOPH has urged
workers of retail businesses in Bangkok not to travel to their hometowns in order to prevent the rapid spread of
coronavirus to their families. The number of confirmed cases in provinces outside of Bangkok has increased
from 59 cases on the 19th of March to 236 cases today.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 22 March 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
IN NUMBERS
total and new cases in
last 24 hours
599 confirmed (188 new)
1 death, 7 severe cases
4,896 persons under
Investigation / treatment
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 22 March 2020
The National Communicable Disease Committee
has asked all Provincial Governors to develop
action plans for screening, case- finding and
disease prevention measures at the district and
sub-district levels.
Some provinces are seeing their first cases.
Testing, isolating positive cases and tracing their
contacts to limit ongoing transmission of the virus
are essential public health responses at this time.
These activities, combined with strict social
distancing measures, are the best tools currently
available to combat the pandemic.
The basic principles to reduce the risk of contracting the virus that causes COVID-19 include the following:
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for essential activities (e.g. to seek medical care or to
purchase food).
• Frequently wash your hands, especially after any contact with ill people or their environment. An alcohol-
based handrub is also effective. For more information on handwashing and hand-rub routines and
protocols, please find them here.
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
• People with symptoms should cover coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clothing, and frequently
wash their hands.
• Maintain a distance of at least 1 meter from other persons at all times.
• Do not shake hands, embrace, share eating utensils or smoking devices with other people.
• Avoid contact with people suffering any symptoms of acute respiratory infection.
• If you are feeling unwell, wear a mask. Do not use N95 respirators as supplies are limited and they are
critically needed for healthcare workers.
• Keep all commonly touched surfaces clean. Advice on cleaning practices and the survivability of the SARS-
CoV-2 virus on surfaces & in different settings is available here.
EXPLAINER: Thailand joins the WHO Solidarity Trial – Global Testing of COVID-19 Drugs
Thailand will join the World Health Organization’s “Solidarity Trial” – an eight-country clinical study for potential
treatments for COVID-19, part of a rapid global search for drugs to treat COVID-19. In addition to Thailand, the
multi-arm, multi-country trial will include the participation of Argentina, Bahrain, Canada, France, Iran, Norway,
South Africa, Spain and Switzerland. The Solidarity trial will test four different drugs or combinations – a)
remdesivir, b) a combination of two drugs, lopinavir and ritonavir, c) the two drugs plus interferon beta, and d)
chloroquine – and will compare their effectiveness to what is called standard of care — the regular support
hospitals treating COVID-19 patients use now.
MEDIA
• WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak and through its website provides
relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies. Media queries can be directed to
sethawebmaster@who.int and risleyp@who.int
• WHO Thailand’s Twitter and Facebook accounts post useful information on hygiene and protection, such
as when and how to use masks, as well as relevant WHO technical guidelines and other content related to
the novel coronavirus situation in Thailand and globally.
WHO THAILAND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
WHO Thailand’s strategic objectives to support Thailand’s response are to:
• Limit transmission to citizens and health care workers thereby slowing the spread of the virus
• Rapidly Identify, isolate and provide the best available care for all patients
• Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission, viral shedding, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines
• Communicate critical risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation
• Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
• Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.
• Thailand is also updating its national pandemic influenza preparedness plan (pending approval by the Prime
Minister’s Cabinet).
• With WHO support, the National Institute of Health of Thailand is supporting specimen testing for other
countries as requested.
• Visitors to Thailand traveling from affected areas are being screened and provided information upon arrival
by the Ministry of Public Health, including how to report any possible illness to the Department of Disease
Control using the 1422 hotline.
• The Ministry has also introduced a self-reporting online tool, available in Thai, English and Chinese, which
can be accessed here.
What WHO is doing in Thailand
• WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of
Public Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates
• WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand.
USEFUL LINKS
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, access the WHO Thailand website:
www.who.int/thailand
• For the latest worldwide figures and technical advice about the outbreak, including how to protect yourself,
access WHO Headquarters’ website: www.who.int including daily global situation reports and WHO’s
technical support worldwide to the COVID-19 response.
• The International Health Regulations (IHR) can be viewed here.
• For the latest on the Thai government response, access the Department of Disease Control, Thai
Ministry of Public Health COVID-19 landing page. *
• The Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422 (dialed from within Thailand).
• The Thai Communicable Diseases Act (revised in 2015) is available here.
• For a comprehensive COVID-19 global case-tracker, access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre for
Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE): in English and Thai.
• Global research on novel coronavirus COVID-19
• The Global Health Network - Coronavirus Outbreak Knowledge Hub - a pop-up area on The Global Health
Network serves as a knowledge hub and access to guidance on COVID-19.
(Note: WHO does not take responsibility for content on external websites.)
For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the COVID-19 outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
