Official address Domenico Scarlattilaan 6 ● 1083 HS Amsterdam ● The Netherlands
An agency of the European Union
Address for visits and deliveries Refer to www.ema.europa.eu/how-to-find-us
Send us a question Go to www.ema.europa.eu/contact Telephone +31 (0)88 781 6000
© European Medicines Agency, 2020. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
28 April 2020
EMA/CAT/94295/2020
Committee for Advanced Therapies
EMA warns against using unproven cell-based therapies
EMA’s Committee for Advanced Therapies (CAT) is advising patients and the general public against
using unregulated cell-based therapies which may not be safe or effective.
The CAT’s advice is in response to individuals, companies and hospitals promoting unproven cell-based
therapies as cures for a broad range of conditions including cancer, cardiovascular diseases, autism,
cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy and vision loss. These treatments can pose serious risks to patients
for little or no benefit.
Patients using unproven or unregulated cell-based therapies have reportedly suffered serious,
sometimes fatal, side effects including infections, unwanted immune reactions, tumour formation, loss
of vision and bleeding in the brain.
Cell-based therapies are treatments using cells from the patient or a donor. The use of blood and cells
for transplantation is a well-established medical practice. However, if cells are not used for the same
essential function in the recipient as in the donor or if they are being substantially manipulated, they
are not considered transplants and their safety and benefits cannot be assumed. For this reason, such
therapies are regulated in the EU as medicinal products.
Rapidly evolving technology in the field of cell-based therapy brings exciting new opportunities for
treating a range of diseases, including many currently considered incurable.
The CAT emphasises that for patients to benefit from the promise of cell-based therapies, well
designed clinical trials on the safety and benefits of cell-based therapies are essential. Such trials are
not only necessary for understanding the safety and benefits of innovative therapies, they also protect
the safety, dignity and rights of patients. Well-designed clinical trials also keep patients informed about
the potential benefits and risks of the treatments and can be used to support authorisation in the EU,
which will ultimately benefit more patients.
When evaluating the data arising from clinical trials of cell-based medicines, the CAT also checks that
the quality of these products is properly controlled. Once the products are authorised in the EU, EMA
and national medicines authorities monitor their safety continuously and share information to enable
them take rapid EU-wide decisions to protect patient’s health.
Circumventing the marketing and clinical trial authorisation procedures makes it difficult to understand
and document the effects of cell-based therapies, thereby depriving future patients of access to
potentially curative treatments.
EMA warns against using unproven cell-based therapies
EMA/110734/2020 Page 2/2
The CAT will continue its work in helping the development of new cell-based and other advanced
therapies with the goal of increasing timely access to these potentially life-changing treatments.
Patients or their families who are considering cell-based therapies should ask their healthcare
professional about the benefits and risks of the treatment and which authority has approved it. They
can also contact their national medicines authority or EMA directly.
