HIGHLIGHTS
• As of 6 February 2020, 25 laboratory-confirmed 2019-nCoV cases have
been reported by health authorities in Thailand, most of them persons
from China, including Wuhan city of Hubei Province, who visited Thailand.
• Besides these cases, 595 persons in Thailand have been under
investigation for 2019-nCoV, with tests still being carried out on the
majority of them, while others have been treated for symptoms and
discharged.
• The confirmed cases of Thai nationals include two taxi drivers who likely
came into contact with infected passengers from China. One of these men
has been released from hospital and appeared at a press conference with
the Thai Ministry of Public Health to share his experience. The Thai authorities are conducting a hygiene
and safety campaign aimed at citizens (including taxi drivers) who come into close contact with international
visitors or who otherwise operate in crowded environments.
• There are also two Thai nationals who traveled to Japan and displayed symptoms after returning to Thailand,
but health authorities say it’s as yet unclear where they acquired their infection.
• A confirmed case in the Republic of Korea had travelled to Thailand prior to onset of illness and diagnosis.
The timeline in this case suggests it is possible infection could have been acquired in either Thailand or in
the Republic of Korea after the person returned home.
• Reports indicate that two confirmed 2019-nCoV patients with relatively severe illness improved significantly
after unlicensed treatment with Lopinavir and Ritonavir (both HIV drugs), and Oseltamivir (usually used to
treat influenza). [Note: WHO guidelines say unlicensed treatments should be administered only in the
context of ethically approved clinical trials or the Monitored Emergency Use of Unregistered Interventions
Framework, with strict monitoring.]
• 138 Thai nationals who were in Wuhan, China, returned to Thailand on 4 February, aboard a specially
commissioned flight Thai AirAsia flight under the auspices of the Government and military. Upon landing at
U-Tapao Airport, Rayong Province, they were immediately sent into quarantine at Navy guesthouses for a
duration of 14 days. All are said to be doing well. Physical examinations and laboratory tests are being
conducted for the entire group, along with a psychosocial assessment.
MEDIA
• The WHO Representative in Thailand, Dr
Daniel Kertesz, participated in a well-
attended media event which was also open
to the public at the Foreign Correspondents
Club of Thailand on 4 February, to discuss
the ongoing outbreak alongside
representatives from the Ministry of Public
Health and the Thai Red Cross who have
been at the forefront of responding to the
outbreak. The audience posed several
questions pertaining to personal safety, the
possible course the outbreak may take and
the response by government and partners.
The WHO Thailand social media accounts
carried live coverage of the event, and
content generated was widely disseminated
by the social media audience, demonstrating how concerned the public is about the outbreak and its
implications.
• WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak, and is revamping its website to better
present relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 6 February 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
IN NUMBERS
total and new cases in
last 24 hours
25 confirmed
595 under investigation
Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 6 February 2020
• The WHO South-East Asia Regional Director, Dr Poonam Khetrapal Singh, issued an op-ed, The Four
Weapons Against Coronavirus, which was carried in the Bangkok Post (print copy and online) on 5 February.
The piece stressed the need for early warning, alert and disease surveillance systems; stepping up infection
prevention and control (IPC) in health facilities; equipping rapid response teams to act decisively; and the
need for streamlined procedures to ensure timely and transparent communication at all levels of
government.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
WHO Thailand’s strategic objectives to support Thailand’s response are to:
• Limit human-to-human transmission including reducing secondary infections among close contacts and
health care workers, preventing transmission amplification events, and preventing further spread within as
well as to and from Thailand i;
• Identify, isolate and care for patients early, including providing optimized care for infected patients;
• Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission and infection, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines;
• Communicate critical risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation;
• Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships.
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
• Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.
• Thailand also recently updated its dedicated national pandemic influenza preparedness plan (currently
pending approval by the Prime Minister’s Cabinet).
• With WHO support, the National Institute of Health of Thailand is supporting specimen testing for other
countries as requested; this support is currently being provided to Myanmar, and support for the Maldives
is also being arranged.
• A special advisory group consisting of former high-level health officials has been formed to support the
Health Ministry in its response to the outbreak.
• The Health Ministry will be conducting modelling exercises with the National Research Council of Thailand
to forecast possible scenarios and outcomes as the outbreak evolves in Thailand.
What WHO is doing in Thailand
• WHO Thailand has been in regular and direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry
of Public Health
• WHO shares information with the Government including key developments elsewhere, as well as guidelines
and updates;
• WHO facilitates the external sharing of the virus between researchers to contribute to regional and global
efforts to develop a vaccine and strengthen efforts to combat the outbreak;
• WHO facilitates support from the WHO collaborating centre in Hong Kong for infectious disease modelling
as required;
• WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand
What WHO is doing globally
• WHO has developed a protocol for the investigation of early cases (the “First Few X (FFX) Cases and
contact investigation protocol for 2019-novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infection”). The protocol is designed
to gain an early understanding of the key clinical, epidemiological and virological characteristics of the first
cases of 2019-nCoV infection detected in any individual country, to inform the development and updating of
public health guidance to manage cases and reduce potential spread and impact of infection.
• WHO has developed interim global guidance for laboratory diagnosis, advice on the use of masks during
home care and in health care settings in the context of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak, clinical
management, infection prevention and control in health care settings, home care for patients with suspected
novel coronavirus, risk communication and community engagement and Global Surveillance for human
infection with novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV).
• WHO has prepared a disease commodity package that includes an essential list of biomedical equipment,
medicines and supplies necessary to care for patients with 2019-nCoV.
• WHO has provided recommendations to reduce risk of transmission from animals to humans.
• WHO has published updated advice for international traffic in relation to the outbreak of the novel
coronavirus 2019-nCoV.
• WHO has activated an R&D blueprint to accelerate diagnostics, vaccines, and therapeutics.
• WHO has developed an online course to provide general introduction to emerging respiratory viruses,
including novel coronaviruses.
• WHO is providing guidance on early investigations, which are critical to carry out early in an outbreak of a
new virus. The data collected from the protocols can be used to refine recommendations for surveillance
and case definitions, to characterize the key epidemiological transmission features of 2019-nCoV, help
understand spread, severity, spectrum of disease, impact on the community and to inform operational
models for implementation of countermeasures such as case isolation, contact tracing and isolation. Several
protocols are available here: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-
guidance/early-investigations
• WHO is working with its networks of researchers and other experts to coordinate global work on surveillance,
epidemiology, modelling, diagnostics, clinical care and treatment, and other ways to identify, manage the
disease and limit onward transmission. WHO has issued interim guidance for countries, which is updated
regularly.
• WHO is working with global expert networks and partnerships for laboratory, infection prevention and
control, clinical management and mathematical modelling.
USEFUL LINKS
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, access WHO Thailand: www.who.int/thailand
• For the latest worldwide figures and technical advice about the outbreak, including how to protect yourself,
access WHO Headquarters: www.who.int including daily global situation reports:
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports/
• For the latest on the Thai government response, access the Department of Disease Control, Thai
Ministry of Public Health 2019-nCoV landing page: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/intro.php
English: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/eng/index.php
Thai: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/index.php
Chinese: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/chn/index.php
Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422
• For a comprehensive 2019-nCoV global case-tracker, via data visualisation including maps and charts,
access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE):
https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ec
f6 (English)
https://mophgis.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/210413ebb5ff49bb8914808af6473322
(Thai)
For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the 2019-nCoV outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
i
This can be achieved through a combination of public health measures, such as rapid identification, diagnosis and management of
the cases, identification and follow up of the contacts, infection prevention and control in healthcare settings, implementation of health
measures for travellers, awareness-raising in the population and risk communication
