Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: guidance for employees
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for employees, employers and businesses
Department for
Business, Energy
& Industrial Strategy
Public Health
England
Going to work
Contents
Going to work
Staying at home
Sick pay
Furloughed workers
Claiming benefits
You should work from home unless it is impossible for you to do so.
Sometimes this will not be possible, as not everyone can work from home. Certain jobs require people to travel to their
place of work – for instance if you operate machinery, work in construction or manufacturing, or are delivering front line
services.
See the full guidance on going to work
.
Staying at home
If you have symptoms of coronavirus infection (COVID-19), however mild, stay at home and do not leave your house for 7
days from when your symptoms started.
If you live with others and you are the first in the household to have symptoms of coronavirus, then you must stay at home
for 7 days, but all other household members who remain well must stay at home and not leave the house for 14 days. The
14-day period starts from the day when the first person in the house became ill.
See the stay at home guidance for more information
.
Sick pay
You can get £94.25 per week Statutory Sick Pay (
SSP) if you’re too ill to work. It’s paid by your employer for up to 28
weeks.
If you are staying at home because ofCOVID-19 you can now claimSSP. This includes individuals who are caring for
people in the same household and therefore have been advised to do a household quarantine.
To check your sick pay entitlement, you should talk to your employer, and visit theStatutory Sick Pay (SSP) page for more
information.
SSP start date
We are legislating for SSP to be paid from day 1, rather than day 4, of your absence from work if you are absent from work
due to sickness or need to stay at home due to COVID-19. Once the legislation has been passed, this will apply
retrospectively from 13 March. You should talk to your employer if you are eligible for SSP and need to claim.
Proof of sickness
If you have COVID-19 or are advised to stay at home, you can get an ‘isolation note’ by visiting
NHS 111 online, rather
than visiting a doctor. For COVID-19 cases this replaces the usual need to provide a ‘fit note’ (sometimes called a ‘sick
note’) after 7 days of sickness absence.
If you’re self-employed or not eligible for SSP
If you are not eligible for SSP – for example if you are self-employed or earning below the Lower Earnings Limit of £118
per week – and you have COVID-19 or are advised to stay at home, you can now more easily make a claim for
Universal
Credit or new styleEmployment and Support Allowance.
If you are eligible for new style Employment and Support Allowance, it will now be payable from day 1 of sickness, rather
than day 8, if you have COVID-19 or are advised to stay at home.
Furloughed workers
If you and your employer both agree, your employer might be able to keep you on the payroll if they’re unable to operate
or have no work for you to do because of coronavirus (COVID-19). This is known as being ‘on furlough’.
You could get paid 80% of your wages, up to a monthly cap of £2,500.
If your salary is reduced as a result of these changes, you may beeligible for support through the welfare system,
including Universal Credit.
Check if you could be covered by the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme
.
Claiming benefits
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Whether you are currently in or out of work, if you are on a low income and affected by the economic impacts of
COVID-
19, you will be able to access the full range of the welfare system, including Universal Credit.
From 6 April we are increasing the standard allowance in Universal Credit and the basic element in Working Tax Credit for
1 year. Both will increase by £20 per week on top of planned annual uprating. This will apply to all new and existing
Universal Credit claimants and to existing Working Tax Credit claimants.
If you have COVID-19 or are staying at home
You are now able toclaim Universal Credit, and if required can access advance payments upfront without needing to
attend a jobcentre.
If you are self-employed
You are able toclaim Universal Credit, providing you meet the usual eligibility criteria.
To support you with the economic impact of the outbreak, and allow you to follow government guidance on self-isolation
and social distancing, from 6 April the requirements of the Minimum Income Floor will be temporarily relaxed. This change
will apply to all Universal Credit claimants and will last for the duration of the outbreak.
New claimants will not need to attend the jobcentre to demonstrate gainful self-employment.
Support for rent costs
You should check your eligibility for Universal Credit, which is available for people in and out of work. Support for rental
costs will be paid through Universal Credit.
From April, we are increasing Local Housing Allowance rates to the 30th percentile of market rents. This applies to all
private renters who are new or existing Universal Credit housing element claimants and to existing Housing Benefit
claimants.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
