HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 21st
of March 2020, 89 new cases of laboratory-confirmed COVID-
19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand (MoPH),
bringing the total number of cases in Thailand to 411.
• The new cases announced today include two cases related to drinking
venue clusters (59 total cases to date) and 32 cases related to boxing
stadium clusters (84 total cases to date). These cases include
waiters/waitresses, managerial staff, spectators at two venues and
relatives.
• Eleven new cases are close contacts of other previously reported cases, six cases are related to attendance
at a religious event in Malaysia, 18 cases are related to travel or contact with travelers, while 20 cases are
still under investigation.
• Of the 411 COVID-19 cases reported in Thailand, 44 have recovered, 366 are receiving treatment (7 cases
are severe) in healthcare settings and one has died.
• There is now a cumulative total of 9,670 Patients Under Investigation (PUIs) in Thailand since the COVID-
19 outbreak began, including 4,004 people being actively investigated or treated. This group includes people
being treated for other conditions who are no longer suspected of having COVID-19 infection.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 21 March 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
IN NUMBERS
total and new cases in
last 24 hours
411 confirmed (89 new)
1 death, 7 severe cases
4,004 persons under
Investigation / treatment
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 21 March 2020
EXPLAINER: Thailand joins the WHO Solidarity Trial – Global Testing of Covid-19 Drugs
Thailand will join the World Health Organization’s “Solidarity Trial” – an eight-country clinical study for potential
treatments for COVID-19, part of a rapid global search for drugs to treat COVID-19.
In addition to Thailand, the multi-arm, multi-country trial will include the participation of Argentina, Bahrain,
Canada, France, Iran, Norway, South Africa, Spain and Switzerland.
The Solidarity trial will test four different drugs or combinations – a) remdesivir, b) a combination of two drugs,
lopinavir and ritonavir, c) lopinavir, ritonavir plus interferon beta, and d) chloroquine – and will compare their
effectiveness to what is called standard of care — the standard supportive care that hospitalized patients
currently receive for COVID-19
RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
The Thailand MOPH recommends that people using public transportation clean their hands each time they
leave the train, bus or taxi. Upon arriving home, people should wash their hands, shower, change cloths before
interacting family members.
The basic principles to reduce the general risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections, including by the
virus causing COVID-19, include the following:
• Avoiding close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections.
• Frequent hand-washing, especially after direct contact with ill people or their environment.
• People with symptoms of acute respiratory infection should practice cough etiquette (maintain distance,
cover coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clothing, and wash hands).
• Within healthcare facilities, enhance standard infection prevention and control practices in hospitals,
especially in emergency departments.
• Advice from WHO on cleaning practices and the survivability of the SARS-CoV-2 virus on surfaces & in
different settings, available here.
• WHO does not recommend specific health measures for travelers. In case of symptoms suggestive of
respiratory illness either during or after travel, travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share
their travel history with their healthcare provider.
MEDIA
• WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak and through its website provides
relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies. Media queries can be directed to
sethawebmaster@who.int and risleyp@who.int
• WHO Thailand’s Twitter and Facebook accounts post useful information on hygiene and protection, such
as when and how to use masks, as well as relevant WHO technical guidelines and other content related to
the novel coronavirus situation in Thailand and globally.
WHO THAILAND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
WHO Thailand’s strategic objectives to support Thailand’s response are to:
• Limit human-to-human transmission including reducing secondary infections among close contacts and
health care workers, preventing transmission amplification events, and preventing further spread within as
well as to and from Thailandi
;
• Identify, isolate and care for patients early, including providing optimized care for infected patients;
• Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission and infection, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines;
• Communicate critical risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation; and
• Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships.
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
• Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.
• Thailand is also updating its national pandemic influenza preparedness plan (pending approval by the Prime
Minister’s Cabinet).
• With WHO support, the National Institute of Health of Thailand is supporting specimen testing for other
countries as requested.
• Visitors to Thailand traveling from affected areas are being screened and provided information upon arrival
by the Ministry of Public Health, including how to report any possible illness to the Department of Disease
Control using the 1422 hotline.
• The Ministry has also introduced a self-reporting online tool, available in Thai, English and Chinese, which
can be accessed here.
What WHO is doing in Thailand
• WHO Thailand remains in regular and direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry
of Public Health, sharing information with the Government including key developments elsewhere, as well
as guidelines and updates.
• WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand.
“You cannot fight a fire blindfolded. And we cannot stop this pandemic if we don’t know who is infected. We
have a simple message for all countries: test, test, test. Test every suspected case. If they test positive,
isolate them and find out who they have been in close contact with up to 2 days before they developed
symptoms, and test those people too.” WHO Director-General, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, 16 March,
Geneva.
USEFUL LINKS
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, access the WHO Thailand website:
www.who.int/thailand
• For the latest worldwide figures and technical advice about the outbreak, including how to protect yourself,
access WHO Headquarters’ website: www.who.int including daily global situation reports and WHO’s
technical support worldwide to the COVID-19 response.
• The International Health Regulations (IHR) can be viewed here.
• For the latest on the Thai government response, access the Department of Disease Control, Thai
Ministry of Public Health COVID-19 landing page. *
• The Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422 (dialed from within Thailand).
• The Thai Communicable Diseases Act (revised in 2015) is available here.
• For a comprehensive COVID-19 global case-tracker, access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre for
Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE): in English and Thai.
• Global research on novel coronavirus COVID-19
• The Global Health Network - Coronavirus Outbreak Knowledge Hub - a pop-up area on The Global Health
Network serves as a knowledge hub and access to guidance on COVID-19.
(Note: WHO does not take responsibility for content on external websites.)
For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the COVID-19 outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
i
This can be achieved through a combination of public health measures, such as rapid identification, diagnosis and management of
the cases, identification and follow up of the contacts, infection prevention and control in healthcare settings, implementation of health
measures for travelers, awareness-raising in the population and risk communication
