N E W S
UAE reports 13 new coronavirus cases, seven more recoveries
21 Mar, 2020: The UAE announced on Saturday the detection of 13 new coronavirus cases and the recovery of seven more
individuals.
The announcement was made by the Ministry of Health and Prevention during a virtual press briefing held in line with the
ongoing precautionary measures taken to avoid gatherings and ensure people's well-being and safety.
During the briefing, Dr. Farida Al Hosani, the official spokesperson for the UAE health sector, highlighted the latest COVID-
19 developments in the country and the measures taken by Emirati authorities to combat the spread of the pandemic.
Al Hosani, who is also the Director of the Department of Communicable Diseases at the Abu Dhabi Centre for Public
Health, said that the new cases were discovered at an early stage due to effective monitoring methods. All of the newly
diagnosed individuals are from various nationalities, Al Hosani noted. She explained that the individuals were identified as
having been in contact with previously diagnosed persons and were quarantined and tested accordingly. Others, she
added, were individuals who came into the country from travels abroad.
The spokesperson said that following the discovery of the new cases, the total number of COVID-19 cases in the UAE had
reached 153.
The new cases include three people each from Britain and Pakistan, four from Bangladesh, and one each from Portugal,
Poland, and the US, she said, stressing that they are all in a stable condition and receiving all necessary healthcare
services.
The new recoveries are from various nationalities as well, including two each from India and the UAE, and one each from
Italy, Britain, and the Philippines, bringing to 38 the total tally of those who have already recovered from the disease in the
country, she explained.
Al Hosani added that two deaths from COVID-19 were confirmed in the country on Friday.
"The first was a 78-year old Arab national who had arrived in the country from Europe. The cause of death was a heart
attack, coinciding with complications from coronavirus. The other individual, a 58-year-old Asian national and resident of
the UAE, had prior chronic illnesses – heart disease and kidney failure – which further complicated their inability to fight
the disease," she explained, stressing that both individuals had received all necessary medical care in the country’s
medical facilities.
"Estijaba" service at the operation center –
Department of Health at: 800-1717
|
Ministry of Health & Prevention at:800-11111
|
Dubai Health Authority at:800-
342
The briefing highlighted the UAE's efforts and immediate response measures to ensure the health and safety of the
general public.
Also discussed during the briefing were measures by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation to
suspend the entry of GCC nationals until a pre-check mechanism involving COVID-19 is approved. Also discussed were
dedicated channels of communication and helplines made available to respond to the queries of those holding valid
residence visas and now outside the country.
She highlighted international statistics on the pandemic that show that the mortality rate is 3.6 percent, adding that this
rate increases among elderly persons and individuals who are immuno-compromised or suffer from chronic illness.
"The Ministry urges the general public to cooperate with health authorities and adhere to precautionary measures
announced – particularly social distancing – to prevent the further spread of COVID-19 and ensure the overall health and
safety of the UAE community."
The spokesperson said that she had seen videos of residents visiting entertainment places such as malls, beaches, and
restaurants - and urged the public to avoid these places, practice social distancing, or altogether stay at home - leaving
only in case of emergency.
Al Hosani added that a negative COVID-19 test does not mean that individuals can socialise without precautions, but
rather must adhere to the 14-day quarantine period to ensure their safety and the safety of others.
}
Privacy
Policy
Terms &
Conditions
© 2020 Department of Health Abu Dhabi. All rights reserved.
