1
Information for healthcare professionals
Version 1.1: Published Friday 17 April 2020
Guidance for provision of midwife-led
settings and home birth in the evolving
coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic
2
Table of changes
1.1 17.4.20 1.1: Added the following elements into data to be considered at each stage:
independent midwives, staff requirements to maintain essential antenatal and postnatal
care, consideration of local geography and demographics.
1.1 17.4.20 3: Reference made to NHS England guidance on the reconfiguration of intrapartum
care services. Recommended co-production of local plans with service user groups.
1.1 17.4.20 Throughout: Revised throughout to ensure compatible with NHS England guidance
on reconfiguration of intrapartum care services.
3
1. Introduction and background
Childbearing women and newborn infants continue to require safe person-centred care during the current
COVID-19 pandemic and they represent a unique population.The majority are healthy, experiencing a life
event that may bring clinical, emotional, psychological, and social needs.Women and newborn infants therefore
require access to quality midwifery care, multidisciplinary services and additional care for complications
including emergencies, if needed.
When staff and services are under extreme stress there is a real risk of increasing avoidable harm, including an
increased risk of infection, morbidity and mortality, and reductions in the overall quality of care. Safety, quality
and preventing avoidable harm must be key priorities in decision making. Continuation of as near normal care
for women should be supported, as it is recognised to prevent poor outcomes.
1.1 Provision of midwife-led birth settings
With reference to the current COVID-19 pandemic, the International Confederation of Midwives (ICM)
recommends that in countries where the health systems can support homebirth, healthy women experiencing
a low-risk pregnancy may benefit from giving birth at home or in midwife-led units rather than in a hospital
where there may be many COVID-19 patients, if there is the ability to provide appropriate midwifery support
and appropriate emergency equipment and transfer.1
This guidance has been developed to support maternity service leads in decision making about midwife-led
birth settings in the evolving coronavirus pandemic, and it was informed by a rapid review conducted by the
RCM Professorial Advisory Group.2
This guidance recommends a staged approach in responding to emerging issues with staff shortages and other
service pressures during the pandemic. Decisions about when to implement each stage will need to be made
at a local level based on current local data:
• Bed occupancy in the maternity unit(s)
• Community workload
•	
Sickness rate among midwifery staff (midwives, maternity support workers and senior student
midwives)
4
•	
Available midwifery staffing (including additional midwives from the NMC emergency register,
independent midwives, those previously in non-clinical roles or year-3 student midwives)
•	
Skill mix of available midwifery staffing – including level of seniority and experience in provision of
community-based care
•	
Availability of ambulances and trained paramedic staff, to provide emergency transfer
1.2 Benefits and safety of midwife-led birth settings
The positive impact of midwife-led birth settings is well documented, including reductions in the need for a
range of medical interventions.3,4,5
These positive impacts remain of significant importance to prevent avoidable
harm, and availability of midwife-led care settings for birth should therefore be continued as far as is possible
during the pandemic.
There is considerable evidence to support the safety of homebirth for healthy women when supported by
qualified midwives practising within a supportive network. Findings from the Birthplace study confirm that, for
women having their first baby, the likelihood of requiring transfer from home to the obstetric unit in labour or
immediately after birth is 45% and from a midwife-led unit is 36-40%. The transfer rate is much lower at 10%
for women having their second (or third or fourth) baby.4
Transfers reported in the study were mostly for non-
emergency reasons such as slow progress in labour and maternal request for pain relief.4
No increased risks of
perinatal or neonatal adverse outcomes for planned homebirths were identified in the largest meta-analysis of
500,000 mother-baby dyads.6
2.	
Principles for equitable, safe, effective, quality maternal and newborn
care in a pandemic
The following principles are critical during the COVID-19 pandemic.They were developed by the RCM’s
COVID-19 Professorial Advisory Group, drawing on evidence of essential components of quality care and
incorporating the latest information from the World Health Organization (WHO) and the ICM on COVID-19.
These principles should underpin maternity care for every woman and baby, every time.
5
Care providers must:2
•	
Continue to provide evidence-based, equitable, safe, compassionate and respectful care for physical and
mental health, wherever and whenever care takes place, by remote access if necessary
• Protect the human rights of women and newborn infants, as far as possible
• Ensure strict hygiene measures and social distancing when possible
• Follow national guidance on use of personal protective equipment (PPE)
• Ensure birth companionship
• Prevent unnecessary interventions
• Not separate a woman from her newborn infant(s) unless absolutely necessary
• Promote and support breastfeeding
• Protect and support staff, including their mental health needs.
3. Midwifery services reorganisation during the COVID-19 pandemic
Service leads will wish to make decisions about reorganisation of their services, including the need to centralise
due to staffing and other service pressures, on the best available evidence.
There is very little evidence available to support changes in configuration of services, and particularly changes
to more centralised services, during the COVID-19 pandemic. Emerging evidence from European settings
supports continuing to strengthen community services in order to enable social distancing and minimise spread
in healthcare settings.7
The importance of deployment of outreach services, community clinics and home care
rather than the centralisation of services has been identified.7,8,9
It may be of benefit for midwifery services to
keep community midwifery staffing as separate as possible from hospital midwifery staffing for as long as this is
feasible to reduce the risk of transmission between staff.8,9
6
The ICM has based their current recommendations for maternity care during COVID-19 on supporting
community birth for healthy women and newborn infants as a means of reducing spread of infection.1
NHS
England clinical guidance10
on temporary reorganisation of intrapartum care during the pandemic states that
freestanding midwifery units and homebirths help to keep women out of hospital and reduce the pressure on
hospital services.
However, it is recognised that safety in birth remote from hospital settings requires the availability of
appropriate midwifery staffing and ambulance transfer facilities. Where these are not available, it may be
necessary to modify available services, seeking at all times to maximise the provision of a safe and positive birth
experience to all women.
The phased approach described below identifies the need to have a flexible approach to service provision –
stepping up into a more centralised service as the impact of the pandemic on staffing and ambulance services
reaches its peak, while seeking to maintain or step back down the provision of midwifery led and community
based care settings when staffing and ambulance provision allows. Decisions about offering birth place options
for women in a particular area are best made in a way that demonstrates recognition that any reduction in
birthplace options is temporary and will be continually reassessed throughout the timeline of the pandemic.
It is important to work and communicate effectively with service users and their families. Input into planning
and changes to services should be sought from local user groups, including MaternityVoices Partnerships
(MVPs) and Maternity Services Liaison Committees (MSLCs). The presence of existing relationships will enable
this to be done rapidly; where possible, plans and communications should be co-produced.
3.1 Phase one: preparation
In the preparation phase, midwifery care should be provided as normal, with all birth settings including home,
freestanding and alongside midwife-led units (FMUs and AMUs), and obstetric units running as usual, for as long
as possible. Birth in midwife-led settings is recommended for low-risk women, as per NICE guidance on place
of birth.5
The percentages set out below are aimed to provide a helpful rule of thumb, to be contextualised for local
need.
7
Women should be advised, through local trust or board websites, other official communications and online
forums, including local service user forums, that the provision of care may need to be adapted as the situation
changes, with communications co-produced with local MVPs/MSLCs.
Prior to triggering phase two, the following should be considered:
•	
Review the number of midwives routinely sent to homebirths. Current policy in most areas across
the UK is for two midwives to attend all homebirths. Consideration may be given to adaptation of
these policies to include senior student midwives, returning registered non-clinical midwives, returning
recently retired midwives or appropriately prepared maternity support workers to attend as the
second member of the team for low-risk home births.
•	
Community midwifery teams and freestanding midwifery units within the same trust/health board
should plan to integrate their systems with all-inclusive rotas so as to maximise the spread of resources
and maintain the full range of maternity settings for as long as sustainable staffing allows.
3.2 Phase two
The second phase is triggered if the midwifery shortage is exacerbated by the pandemic and is above 20%.The
impact of the percentage of staff shortages will vary according to the location of the care; a smaller shortage
may have a greater impact in a very rural area, for example.
Local geography and demographics should therefore also shape decision making when moving from one phase
to another.
Midwifery shortage between
10-20%
Ambulance service running
as usual
All place of birth available, for as long as possible
8
Midwives practising in the community should have their workload reviewed and where possible the provision
of antenatal and postnatal care rationalised, in line with RCM/RCOG guidance.11
This will include increasing the
provision of virtual rather than face to face appointments where appropriate.
In some NHS trusts/health boards there are multiple midwife-led units.To ensure viability it may be necessary
to reduce the number of freestanding midwife-led units providing care, and to prioritise alongside over
freestanding midwife-led units to reduce the workload of the ambulance service, especially if delays in response
time start to be experienced.
Consider the following points to enable decision making about rationalising place of birth options for women:
•	
Scale-up the number of rooms on AMUs, or set up midwifery-led rooms on obstetric-led units to
ensure women who prefer, or are eligible for, midwifery-led care can receive it.
•	
Utilise midwifery staff more flexibly between different areas, to support women’s choice of place of
birth, while maintaining a safe level of antenatal and postnatal care. 11
•	
Provide virtual midwifery support and assessment to enable longer stays at home in early labour,
where this is appropriate.
•	
Offer homebirth only to low-risk multiparous women and offer low-risk primiparous women option of
alongside midwife-led unit birth, to reduce need for intrapartum transfers.
• Encourage early discharge from midwife-led units to free up intrapartum capacity.
Midwifery shortage between
20-30%
Ambulance service
experiencing minor delays
Restricted homebirth service
Prioritise births in AMUs
9
•	
Ensure communication with ambulance service is in place and category 1 calls only are requested of
them.
•	
Use dedicated services for emergency transfer (including private or army ambulances) and dedicated
private taxi for non-emergency transfer.
During phase two, women should be made aware of plans for centralisation if phase three is triggered, through
individual contact with women booked for birth at home or in a midwife-led setting; trust and board websites;
other official communications and online forums, including local service user forums. Communications should
be co-produced with local MVPs/MSLCs.
3.3 Phase three
Phase three is triggered once the midwifery shortage is over 30% or once the ambulance service is unable to
support category 1 emergency calls without severe delays. If the safety of homebirth cannot be assured and
midwifery staffing does not allow safe staffing of all places of birth, centralisation is recommended.
Anticipation is recommended so local trusts/health boards should have protocols and standard operating
procedures in place and be able to trigger phase three smoothly and safely.
Alongside midwife-led units will be the only midwife-led settings available to women, as well as allocated
midwife-led rooms on obstetric units in those NHS trusts/health boards lacking an alongside midwife-led unit.
Midwifery shortage over 30%
Ambulance service
experiencing severe delays
Centralisation in AMU/obstetric units
Discontinuation of homebirth service
Only births before arrival covered by community midwives
10
3.4 Phase four: de-escalation
It is essential that the changes recommended by this guidance are reviewed daily and de-escalated according to
the availability of midwifery staff and safe transfer.
3.4.1 Table: process for de-escalation
Midwifery shortage over
30%
Midwifery shortage between 20 and 30% Midwifery shortage between 10%
and 20%
Centralisation in alongside
midwife-led and obstetric
units
• Reinstate restricted homebirth service
• Reinstate freestanding midwifery-led units
• 
All-inclusive rota for community and
midwifery-led unit midwives
•Reinstate homebirth service for
all women
•Reinstate all options for place of
birth
11
References
1. 
International Confederation of Midwives. Rights in childbirth must be upheld during the coronavirus
pandemic. Position statement (2020) Available at: https://www.internationalmidwives.org/icm-news/
women’s-rights-in-childbirth-must-be-upheld-during-the-coronavirus-pandemic.html [Accessed 8 April
2020]
2. 
Renfrew MJ, Cheyne HL, Hunter B, Downe S. with Sandall J, Spiby H, Dykes F, LavenderT, Page L. Optimising
maternity services and maternal and newborn outcomes in a pandemic: a rapid analytic scoping review. 2020.
Royal College of Midwives, London.
3. 
Scarf VL at al. Maternal and perinatal outcomes by planned place of birth among women with low-risk
pregnancies in high-income countries:A systematic review and meta-analysis. MidwiferyVol 62 PP240-255.
doi: 10.1016/j.midw.2018.03.024
4. 
Birthplace in England Collaborative Group. Perinatal and maternal outcomes by planned place of birth for
healthy women with low-risk pregnancies: the Birthplace in England national prospective cohort study. BMJ
2011; 343 doi: 10.1136/bmj.d7400
5. 
National Institute for Care Excellence. Clinical Guideline 190: Intrapartum care for healthy women and
babies.Available at: nice.org.uk/guidance/cg190/chapter/recommendations#place-of-birth [Accessed 8 April
2020]
6. 
Hutton, EK; Reitsma,A; Simioni, J; Brunton, G; Kaufman, K. Perinatal or neonatal mortality among women who
intend at the onset of labour to give birth at home compared to women of low obstetrical risk who intend
to give birth in hospital:A systematic review and meta-analyses. EClinicalMedicine 2019Vol: 14, Page: 59-70
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2019.07.005
7.
WHO Scientific andTechnical Advisory Group for Infectious Hazards. COVID-19: what is next for public
health? Lancet 2020; 395:542-545 doi 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30374-3.32061313.
8.
World Health Organization. COVID-19: Operational guidance for maintaining essential health services
during an outbreak. Available at: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/covid-19-operational-guidance-for-
maintaining-essential-health-services-during-an-outbreak [Accessed 8 April 2020]
12
9. 
Nacoti, Mirco, et al.At the Epicenter of the Covid-19 Pandemic and Humanitarian Crisis in Italy: Changing
Perspectives on Preparation and Mitigation. NEJM Catalyst 2020. Doi: 10.1056/CAT.20.0080
10. 
NHS England, Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of intrapartum maternity care during the
coronavirus pandemic.Available from: https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/
sites/52/2020/04/C0241-specialty-guide-intrapartum-maternity-care-9-april-2020.pdf
11. 
RCM/RCOG Guidance for antenatal and postnatal services during the evolving Coronavirus (COVID-19)
pandemic. Available at: https://www.rcog.org.uk/en/guidelines-research-services/guidelines/coronavirus-
pregnancy/
13
Authors
Lia Brigante, RCM Quality & Standards Advisor
Mervi Jokinen, RCM Professional Advisor
Mary Ross-Davie, RCM Director
Birte Harlev-Lam, RCM Executive Director
Eddie Morris, RCOG
Pat O’Brien, RCOG/UCLH
Jennifer Jardine, RCOG
Sophie Relph, RCOG
Anita Powell, RCOG
14
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 10-18 Union Street, London, SE1 1SZ
T: +44 (0) 20 7772 6200 E: covid-19@rcog.org.uk W: rcog.org.uk Registered Charity No. 213280
@RCObsGyn @rcobsgyn @RCObsGyn
DISCLAIMER: The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) has produced this
guidance as an aid to good clinical practice and clinical decision-making.This guidance is based on
the best evidence available at the time of writing, and the guidance will be kept under regular review
as new evidence emerges.This guidance is not intended to replace clinical diagnostics, procedures
or treatment plans made by a clinician or other healthcare professional and RCOG accepts no
liability for the use of its guidance in a clinical setting. Please be aware that the evidence base for
COVID-19 and its impact on pregnancy and related healthcare services is developing rapidly and the
latest data or best practice may not yet be incorporated into the current version of this document.
RCOG recommends that any departures from local clinical protocols or guidelines should be fully
documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
