Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 20 March 2020
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 20 March 2020

HIGHLIGHTS
•

On the 20th of March 2020, 50 new cases of laboratory-confirmed COVID19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand (MoPH),
bringing the total number of cases in Thailand to 322.

THAILAND SITUATION
IN NUMBERS
total and new cases in
last 24 hours

•

The new cases announced today include 5 cases related to drinking
venue clusters (62 total cases to date) and 18 cases related to boxing
stadium clusters (72 total cases to date). These cases include
waiters/waitresses, managerial staff, spectators and relatives.

•

Twelve new cases are close contacts of other previously reported cases,
six cases are related to attendance at a religious event in Malaysia, 6 cases are related to travel or contact
with travelers, while 3 cases are still under investigation.

•

Of the 322 COVID-19 cases reported in Thailand, 43 have recovered, 278 are receiving treatment in
healthcare settings and one has died.

•

There is now a cumulative total of 8,729 Patients Under Investigation (PUIs) in Thailand since the COVID19 outbreak began, including 4,004 people being actively investigated or treated. This group includes people
being treated for other conditions who are no longer suspected of having COVID-19 infection.

•

To date, approximately 80% of confirmed cases have been in Bangkok. The MoPH is working with the
Bangkok Governor’s office to identify designated COVID-19 wards in specific hospitals.

Distribution of COVID-19 Cases in Thailand.

322 confirmed (50 new)
1 death, 3 severe cases
4,004 persons under
Investigation / treatment

EXPLAINER: “Flattening the curve”
One way to present information about an outbreak or epidemic is to graph the number of cases of infected
people over time. A very high curve is created by a steep increase in the number of cases per day, followed by
a quick decrease in the number of cases. A flatter curve is created by a more gradual increase in the number
of cases per day and a more gradual decrease. Over a long period of time the number of people infected might
be around the same, but the difference is the number of cases that occur each day.

This is important because in every country, there are limited numbers of hospitals, nurses and doctors. The
capacity of the health system can be exceeded if too many people seek healthcare at the same time (red
curve above). The flatter the curve, the more likely it is that hospitals can continue to deliver care to the
people they serve (blue curve). We flatten the curve by slowing down transmission of COVID-19.
It is important to realise that every single one of us has a role to play in flattening the curve. Doctors need to
identify and test possible cases quickly and place them in strict isolation, so they can’t infect others. Public
health authorities need to identify close contacts of cases and place them into strict quarantine to limit
possible spread. Physical distancing measures like cancelling sporting events, concerts and other large
gatherings can also help to slow transmission of the virus.
Members of the public can also make a big difference. If you start to wash their hands regularly, you will help
everyone. If you practice respiratory hygiene (cough into a tissue, dispose of it safely and wash your hands),
you will also help. If you maintain a metre or more distance from other people when you go out, and if you
stay at home when you are sick, you will protect yourself, your family, your community and your nation. And if
we all do this, we can make this epidemic manageable.

RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
The Thailand MOPH recommends that people using public transportation clean their hands each time they
leave the train, bus or taxi. Upon arriving home, people should wash their hands, shower, change cloths before
interacting family members.
The basic principles to reduce the general risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections, including by the
virus causing COVID-19, include the following:
• Avoiding close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections.
• Frequent hand-washing, especially after direct contact with ill people or their environment.
• People with symptoms of acute respiratory infection should practice cough etiquette (maintain distance,
cover coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clothing, and wash hands).
• Within healthcare facilities, enhance standard infection prevention and control practices in hospitals,
especially in emergency departments.
• Advice from WHO on cleaning practices and the survivability of the SARS-CoV-2 virus on surfaces & in
different settings, available here.
• WHO does not recommend specific health measures for travelers. In case of symptoms suggestive of
respiratory illness either during or after travel, travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share
their travel history with their healthcare provider.

MEDIA
•
•

WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak and through its website provides
relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies. Media queries can be directed to
sethawebmaster@who.int and risleyp@who.int
WHO Thailand’s Twitter and Facebook accounts post useful information on hygiene and protection, such
as when and how to use masks, as well as relevant WHO technical guidelines and other content related to
the novel coronavirus situation in Thailand and globally.

WHO THAILAND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
WHO Thailand’s strategic objectives to support Thailand’s response are to:
•
•
•
•
•

Limit human-to-human transmission including reducing secondary infections among close contacts and
health care workers, preventing transmission amplification events, and preventing further spread within as
well as to and from Thailand i;
Identify, isolate and care for patients early, including providing optimized care for infected patients;
Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission and infection, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines;
Communicate critical risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation; and
Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships.

PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
•
•
•
•
•

Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.
Thailand is also updating its national pandemic influenza preparedness plan (pending approval by the Prime
Minister’s Cabinet).
With WHO support, the National Institute of Health of Thailand is supporting specimen testing for other
countries as requested.
Visitors to Thailand traveling from affected areas are being screened and provided information upon arrival
by the Ministry of Public Health, including how to report any possible illness to the Department of Disease
Control using the 1422 hotline.
The Ministry has also introduced a self-reporting online tool, available in Thai, English and Chinese, which
can be accessed here.

What WHO is doing in Thailand
•
•

WHO Thailand remains in regular and direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry
of Public Health, sharing information with the Government including key developments elsewhere, as well
as guidelines and updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand.

“You cannot fight a fire blindfolded. And we cannot stop this pandemic if we don’t know who is infected. We
have a simple message for all countries: test, test, test. Test every suspected case. If they test positive,
isolate them and find out who they have been in close contact with up to 2 days before they developed
symptoms, and test those people too.”
 WHO Director General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, 16 March, Geneva.

USEFUL LINKS
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, access the WHO Thailand website:
www.who.int/thailand
For the latest worldwide figures and technical advice about the outbreak, including how to protect yourself,
access WHO Headquarters’ website: www.who.int including daily global situation reports and WHO’s
technical support worldwide to the COVID-19 response.
The International Health Regulations (IHR) can be viewed here.
For the latest on the Thai government response, access the Department of Disease Control, Thai
Ministry of Public Health COVID-19 landing page. *
The Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422 (dialed from within Thailand).
The Thai Communicable Diseases Act (revised in 2015) is available here.
For a comprehensive COVID-19 global case-tracker, access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre for
Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE): in English and Thai.
Global research on novel coronavirus COVID-19
The Global Health Network - Coronavirus Outbreak Knowledge Hub - a pop-up area on The Global Health
Network serves as a knowledge hub and access to guidance on COVID-19.
(Note: WHO does not take responsibility for content on external websites.)

For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the COVID-19 outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
i

This can be achieved through a combination of public health measures, such as rapid identification, diagnosis and management of
the cases, identification and follow up of the contacts, infection prevention and control in healthcare settings, implementation of health
measures for travelers, awareness-raising in the population and risk communication

