10th
March 2020
STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE (SOP) TO HANDLE CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19)
FOR INTERNATIONAL CRUISE SHIPS AT MAJOR PORTS OF INDIA
The following SOPs shall be in place with immediate effect for all international cruise
ships, who had planned and intimated their call to Major Ports of India in advance:
(i) Only those international cruise ships which had planned and intimated their call
to an Indian Port not later than 1st
January, 2020 will be allowed to call on such
port.
(ii) Any international cruise ship or any member of its crew or any passenger therein
having a travel history of visiting any of the Covid-19 affected countries
mentioned in the adjoining link
(https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-
2019/situation-reports) since 1st
Feb, 2020; will not be permitted to enter any
Indian port till 31st
March, 2020.
(iii) International cruise ships will be allowed only on the ports having thermal
screening facilities for passenger and crew.
(iv) Shipping Agent/Master of Vessel to submit all documents related to crew and
passengers regarding their travel to/from the COVID-19 affected countries. No
sick passengers/crew will be allowed to board the ship by Shipping
agent/Master of Vessel.
(v) The updated information on COVID-19 shall be provided to each international
cruise vessel and should be as per guidelines of Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare (MoH&FW), Govt. of India. (https://www.mohfw.gov.in/).
(vi) All passengers and crew members will have to fill the Self Reporting Form as
prescribed by MoH&FW (copy attached at Annex-1) and submitted to PHO.
(vii) Port Health Officer (PHO) will carry out thermal screening of all the passengers
and crew members on board ship. Until clearance by PHO, passengers will not
be allowed ashore. Port / Local hospital to assist PHO by supplying additional
doctors and medical staff and logistics etc.
(viii) If any passengers/crew show symptoms of the disease, disembarking of such
passengers/crew will not be permitted. The passenger will be quarantined on
the ship. Samples of the patient will be collected and sent to designated
hospital/lab for testing. If sample is tested positive, the passenger will be taken
to the isolation facility attached to the Port and the ship will be asked to move
out. If sample is negative, the passengers and crew will be allowed shore
excursion. A declaration to follow this procedure will be taken from all ships
before they are allowed to enter the Port.
(ix) Cruise ships need to take special measures to prevent coronavirus affected
patients to board the ships in the first place. Some of these steps will include:
a) Any cruise guests who have traveled through China, Hong Kong, Iran, South
Korea and Italy and other affected countries ( as defined by WHO in their
daily reports https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-
coronavirus-2019/situation-reports) in the past 14 days are automatically
denied boarding by the cruise lines.
b) Any person having contact with anyone within last 14-days prior to travel
who has travel history to mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, Iran, South
Korea, or Italy or any other affected countries is automatically denied
boarding.
c) Mandatory screenings are performed of persons with influenza like illnesses
(ILIs) in boarding ports terminals.
d) All guests onboard have to fill out self-declaration health forms.
e) At the check-in counter of the boarding ports, the guest’s passports are
verified for any stamps from COVID-19 affected countries.
f) The passports are double checked by cruise vessel personnel inside the
terminal at Boarding ports to ensure nothing is amiss
g) All passports are also checked onboard by cruise vessel staff alongside Indian
Immigration Officers, wherever the Immigration Officers boarded in the
previous foreign ports for enroute clearance.
h) The ship should be regularly sanitized.
i) All cruises carry out daily examination of all passengers for symptoms for
COVID-19.
j) All cruises should have sufficiently oriented health staff with adequate
logistics like masks, personal protection equipments etc. along with
sufficient isolation beds where any crew/passenger suspects can be isolated
in case of detection of any symptoms.
