Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for those who provide unpaid care to
friends or family
Published 8 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Coronavirus (COVID-19): providing unpaid care
Department
of Health &
Social Care
Who this guidance is for
This guidance is for anyone who cares, unpaid, for a friend or family member who, due to a lifelong condition, illness,
disability, serious injury, a mental health condition or an addiction, cannot cope without their support.
It builds on other guidance published on GOV.UK, including theStay at home guidance and the Guidance on social
Contents
Who this guidance is for
General advice
If you or the person you care for has symptoms
distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and vulnerable adults.
What we mean by clinically ‘vulnerable groups’ and clinically ‘extremely vulnerable groups’ in
relation to COVID-19 infection
Following the Guidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and vulnerable adults
,
clinically vulnerable people are those who are at increased risk of severe illness from coronavirus infection (COVID-19).
This group includes:
those who are aged 70 or older (regardless of medical conditions)
those under 70 with a specified, underlying health condition (for adults, this usually means anyone instructed to get a flu
jab as an adult each year on medical grounds)
pregnant women
There are some clinical conditions that put people at even higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19. If you, or the
person you care for, are in this category, from the week of 23 March the NHS in England will be in contact with advice on
the more stringent measures you should take in order to keep you and those you care for safe. You should follow
measures in the Guidance for clinically extremely vulnerable (shielded) groups.
It is important to consider your personal situation. The section below on ‘
If you or the person you care for has symptoms’
gives advice for people with different types of clinical vulnerability to COVID-19.
General advice
What you should be doing to prepare
Where you or the person you care for have no symptoms then please refer to the guidance on hygiene on the
NHS
website.
We advise all carers to create an emergency plan with the person they care for, to use in circumstances where help from
other people to deliver care may be needed. Depending on the circumstances, this could be help from family or friends, or
a care provider.
In order to create an emergency plan that fits the needs of the person you care for, you will need to set out:
the name and address and any other contact details of the person you look after
who you and the person you look after would like to be contacted in an emergency
details of any medication the person you look after is taking
details of any ongoing treatment they need
details of any medical appointments they need to keep
You should also ensure that it is in a format that can readily be shared with other people who will need to discuss the plan
with the person you care for.
Further information can be found atCarers UK.
You may be able to arrange help and support from family and friends, but it can be reassuring to have the involvement of
your local authority or healthcare provider in case informal arrangements fall through. It may also be helpful to contact
your local carers support organisation who can help with contingency planning. You can find out about local carer
organisations at Carers UK.
You can also find information out about local services on theCarers Trust website.
Protecting yourself and the person you care for
Keep up to date with announcements and advice on GOV.UK and follow the latest advice set out in the
Guidance on
social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and vulnerable adults, which includes tips on how to
help protect a vulnerable person you live with.
Cleaning your hands frequently throughout the day by washing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using hand
sanitiser will help protect you and the people you live with. This step is one of the most effective ways of reducing the risk
of infection for you and other people. This includes when you arrive at the home of the person you care for, if you do not
live with them, or have been out.
See specific situations below for what to do if you or the person you care for display symptoms.
Caring for someone who is clinically ‘extremely vulnerable’
The guidance on shielding and protecting the clinically extremely vulnerablepeople from COVID-19 gives details. From
the week of 23 March, those in the clinically ‘extremely vulnerable’ group should also have received a letter from the
relevant GP or specialist with further information.
If you are caring for someone who falls into the clinically ‘extremely vulnerable’ category for risk of severe illness from
COVID-19, there are some simple steps that you can take to protect them and to reduce their risk. Ensure you follow
advice on good hygiene:
only care that is essential should be provided
wash your hands when you arrive at the home of the person you care for and often thereafter, using soap and water for
at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitiser
cover your mouth and nose with a tissue or your sleeve (not your hands) when you cough or sneeze
put used tissues in the bin immediately and wash your hands afterwards
do not visit if you are unwell and make alternative arrangements for their care
provide information on who they should call if they feel unwell, how to use the
NHS 111 online coronavirus service and
leave the number for NHS 111 prominently displayed
find out about different sources of support that could be used and access further advice on creating a contingency plan
is available from Carers UK
If the person you care for is concerned about their usual paid carer coming in and out of their home
and the risk of infection
The government has issued guidance to home care providers to ensure that appropriate levels of hygiene are achieved to
reduce the risk of infection. Speak to the care provider about the processes they are following to maintain good hygiene.
If the person you care for receives regular health or social care from an organisation, either through yourlocal authority or
paid for by themselves, inform their care provider that they are reducing social contacts and agree on a plan for continuing
their care.
As a carer, the Guidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and vulnerable adults
provides advice on the extra precautions you can take to help keep the person you care for safe.
Facemasks
We do not recommend the use of facemasks as an effective means of preventing the spread of infection, unless advised
by a healthcare professional. Facemasks play an important role in clinical settings, such as hospitals, where staff are
trained in the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) but there is little evidence of benefit from their general use
outside of these settings.
If the person you care for is in a care home
If you have no symptoms, you should keep in contact with the care home to understand any local arrangement to keep in
touch with residents and follow the Guidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and
vulnerable adults. This guidance includes tips on how to maintain contact with relatives or friends such as staying in touch
via phone or post where you are unable, or it is not advisable, to visit.
Maintaining your own health while you are looking after others
It is important that you look after your own health and wellbeing as well as supporting others you care for, especially given
the potential for additional stresses at the current time and the potential for reduced access to support such as respite
care. There is information in the Stay at home guidance and the Guidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and
protecting older people and vulnerable adults about looking after your wellbeing, as well as more detailed guidance on self-
care and sources of support for mental health and wellbeing during the outbreak.
Tips include taking care of your mind as well as your body and getting support if you need it. Daily physical activity is
important for health and wellbeing, including managing stress, and encouraging positive feelings and sleep. You can look
for ideas of exercises you can do at home from Public Health England (PHE).
Draw on support you might have through your friends, family and other networks during this time. Try to stay in touch with
those around you over the phone, by post, or online. Let people know how you would like to stay in touch and build that
into your routine. This is also important in looking after your mental wellbeing and you may find it helpful to talk to them
about how you are feeling.
There are sources of support and information that can help, such as theEvery Mind Matters website.
Remember it is OK to share your concerns with others you trust and in doing so you may end up providing support to
them, too. Or you can use a NHS recommended helpline.
It may also be helpful to contact your local carers support organisation who can help with contingency planning. You can
find out about local carer organisations at Carers UK. There is also an online forum on Carers UK.
Accessing alternative care quickly if you are unable to provide care
Having to organise alternative care can be difficult and concerning. Where possible, you should contact friends and family
who may be able to give immediate help in providing care. You should follow the guidelines set out in the Stay at home
guidance and the Guidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and vulnerable adults
to protect those coming into the home of the person who needs care.
If you cannot organise alternative care you can contact yourlocal authority or health care provider.
If you do not know how to do this, you can contact NHS 111.
If you need time off work to care for a relative who has symptoms or is self-isolating
You should talk to your employer about your caring needs and what arrangements can be put in place. Information
regarding statutory sick pay entitlements can be found in the Guidance for employees.
Some people may be entitled to benefits as a carer, such as Carer’s Allowance. You should check on GOV.UK for further
details.
Collecting prescriptions if you are self-isolating
If you normally collect prescriptions for the person you care for, you will not be able to do this if you are self-isolating. Most
pharmacies provide a home delivery service. Telephone them to see if this is available or if there is another scheme
running locally to help you access prescriptions.
Pharmacy delivery services will be under pressure at the moment, so it is important that you order your repeat
prescriptions in good time, to avoid delays in dispensing. Information on repeat prescriptions and delivery services may
also be available via your GP practice website.
If you or the person you care for has symptoms
If the person you care for has symptoms
The person you care for has symptoms, and you are not in a clinically ‘vulnerable group’ or clinically ‘extremely
vulnerable group’ with increased risk of severe illness
If someone in your household has symptoms you should follow theStay at home guidance which states that if you live
alone and you have symptoms of COVID-19, however mild, you should stay at home for 7 days from when your symptoms
started or until you are better, whichever is the longer.
If you live with others and you are the first in the household to have symptoms of coronavirus, then you must stay at home
for 7 days, or until your symptoms have gone, but all other household members who remain well must stay at home and
not leave the house for 14 days.
The 14-day period starts from the day when the first person in the house became ill. For anyone else in the household
who starts displaying symptoms, they need to stay at home for 7 days from when their symptoms appeared – or until their
symptoms have gone, whichever is the longer – regardless of what day they are on in the original 14-day isolation period.
However, we appreciate following the Stay at Home guidance may not be easy to achieve where you provide close
contact care, such as washing and bathing, for a spouse or relative.
If you do not fall into the clinically ‘vulnerable group’ or the clinically ‘extremely vulnerable group’ you can continue to
provide care. You should review the above guidelines to take measures to protect yourself and others in the household as
best you can by following advice on hygiene and distancing where possible.
Information on cleaning and hygiene when caring for someone with symptoms
The Stay at home guidance provides information on washing your hands, cleaning and disposing of waste, and cleaning
laundry, as well as other information for those living with a vulnerable person.
The person you care for has symptoms and you are in a clinically ‘vulnerable group’ (see above)
If someone in your household has symptoms you should follow theStay at home guidance which states that if you live
alone and you have symptoms of COVID-19, however mild, stay at home for 7 days from when your symptoms started.
If you live with others and you are the first in the household to have symptoms of coronavirus, then you must stay at home
for 7 days, but all other household members who remain well must stay at home and not leave the house for 14 days.
The 14-day period starts from the day when the first person in the house became ill. For anyone else in the household
who starts displaying symptoms, they need to stay at home for 7 days from when the symptoms appeared, regardless of
what day they are on in the original 14-day isolation period.
You should also review theGuidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and
vulnerable adults for information about those people who are considered at increased risk of severe illness from
coronavirus (COVID-19). If you are within this group, you should be particularly stringent in following social distancing
measures set out in the guidance.
However, we appreciate this may not be easy to achieve where you provide close contact care for a spouse or relative
such as washing and bathing.
Where possible ask friends and family who can support you in providing care. You should distance yourself from the
person you care for as much as possible and follow the above guidance.
You can find out about local carer organisations atCarers UK or through yourlocal authority.
The person you care for has symptoms and you are in a clinically ‘extremely vulnerable group’ (see above)
As per the guidance for clinically extremely vulnerable groups, you should strictly avoid contact with someone who is
displaying symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19).
Where possible, ask friends and family who can support you in providing care for their help. You should distance yourself
from the person you care for as much as possible and follow the above guidance.
If you cannot organise alternative care you can contact yourlocal authority or health care provider. If you do not know how
to do this you can contact NHS 111. It may also be helpful to contact your local carers support organisation. You can find
out about local carer organisations at Carers UK.
If you are a carer and you have symptoms
If someone in your household has symptoms you should follow theStay at home guidance which states that if you live
alone and you have symptoms of COVID-19, however mild, stay at home for 7 days from when your symptoms started.
If you live with others and you are the first in the household to have symptoms of coronavirus, then you must stay at home
for 7 days, but all other household members who remain well must stay at home and not leave the house for 14 days.
The 14-day period starts from the day when the first person in the house became ill. For anyone else in the household
who starts displaying symptoms, they need to stay at home for 7 days from when the symptoms appeared, regardless of
what day they are on in the original 14-day isolation period.
However, we appreciate this may not be easy to achieve where you provide close contact care for a spouse or relative
such as washing and bathing.
If you care for a person in a clinically ‘vulnerable group’ do not visit if you are unwell and make alternative arrangements
for their care with family members and friends. If you cannot organise alternative care you can contact your local authority
or NHS trust.
If you care for a person in a clinically ‘extremely vulnerable group’, you should strictly avoid contact with the person you
care for and, where possible, ask friends and family who can support you for help in providing care. You should distance
yourself from the person you care for as much as possible and follow the above guidance.
If you cannot organise alternative care you can contact yourlocal authority or health care provider. If you do not know how
to do this, you can contact NHS 111. It may also be helpful to contact your local carers support organisation. You can find
out about local carer organisations at Carers UK.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
