Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Water and sewerage company OSM and UWWTR
sampling affected by COVID-19: RPS C3
Published 6 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Water and sewerage company OSM and UWWTR sampling affected by COVID-19: RPS C3
You need a permit to discharge sewage and trade effluent into inland freshwaters, coastal waters and groundwater. This
COVID-19 regulatory position statement (RPS) applies to regulatory sampling carried out in accordance with your permit
Contents
1. When this COVID-19 RPS applies
2. Conditions you must comply with
3. Enforcement
4. When to check back
5. Contact
in relation to Operator Self-Monitoring (OSM) and Urban Waste Water Treatment Regulations 1994 (UWWTR) monitoring.
Water and sewerage companies that monitor discharges from wastewater treatment works (
WwTW) and water treatment
works (WTW) must check that discharges comply with numeric quality limits in environmental permits.
If you follow the conditions in this COVID-19RPS you can reduce how often you self-monitor discharges of:
treated sewage effluent from WwTW
trade effluent fromWTW
You must get written agreement from your Environment Agency water company account manager before you use this
COVID-19 RPS.
1. When this COVID-19 RPS applies
This COVID-19 RPS only applies if you have missed any sample collections or analysis because of:
staff shortages due to COVID-19
restricted access caused by people or places being infected or potentially infected with COVID-19 – for example, if a
WwTW, WTW or laboratory is in a zone of restricted access
In those circumstances, and provided you meet the conditions in this COVID-19RPS, we will not expect you to:
reschedule missed OSM and UWWTR sample(s)
collect and report the number ofOSM and UWWTR samples required by your permit in 2020
You must demonstrate that you have taken all reasonable steps to continue sampling and analysis. Reasonable steps
include:
contingency planning to avoid or minimise disruption to your business because of COVID-19
COVID-19 response planning to minimise the impact and duration of not being able to comply with your permit
2. Conditions you must comply with
You must comply with all the other requirements of your environmental permit.
You must minimise the number ofOSM and UWWTR samples you miss and cannot reschedule and maintain a record of
those missed.
You must prioritise collecting and analysing OSM samples of discharges fromWwTW and WTW which have the greatest
potential to cause environmental damage.
You must give highest priority toOSM sampling of discharges upstream of drinking water abstractions. This includes
groundwater discharges into a groundwater source protection zone 1.
You must also give highest priority to discharges which fall into the following permit condition or performance categories:
numeric limits that protect Natura 2000 sites, Ramsar sites or sites of special scientific interest
numeric limits for ammoniacal nitrogen of 5 mg/l or less
numeric limits for phosphorus of 1mg/l or less
UV disinfection for shellfish and/or bathing waters
increased sample frequency due to previous numeric limit failures
You must update your relevant quality management systems to reflect changes to your monitoring programmes after you
have prioritised.
You must keep records that show why you needed to use this COVID-19RPS. For example, records of:
staff absences
contractors being unavailable
supply chain failures
You must keep these records for 24 months after this COVID-19RPS has expired, including any extensions to it. You
must make them available to the Environment Agency on request.
You must make sure your activities do not endanger human health or the environment.
You must not:
cause a risk to water, air, soil, plants or animals
adversely affect the countryside or places of special interest
Places of Special Interest include but are not limited to:
European sites (Special Areas of Conservation and Special Protection Areas)
Ramsar sites
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
national and local nature reserves
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Marine Conservation Zones
National Parks
You must continue to tell the Environment Agency about any performance issues or pollution incidents, following normal
reporting routes and processes. This is required by permit condition 4.3.1 and operational instruction 16_02.
3. Enforcement
A COVID-19 RPS means that the Environment Agency will not normally take enforcement action against you provided:
your activity meets the description set out in this COVID-19RPS
you comply with the conditions set out in this COVID-19RPS
your activity does not, and is not likely to, cause environmental pollution or harm human health
you have taken all reasonable steps to comply with your permits
If a WwTW does not have the required number ofUWWTR samples taken and reported in 2000, we will not record them
in the 2020 Environmental Performance Assessment as failing for not having enough samples. This is provided they meet
all of the conditions in this COVID-19 RPS.
If you operate under this COVID-19 RPS but think you may no longer be able to comply with its conditions, you must tell
the Environment Agency immediately.
The Environment Agency will monitor how operators use and comply with this COVID-19RPS through its proportionate,
risk-based inspection and monitoring activity.
4. When to check back
This COVID-19 RPS will be withdrawn on 30 June 2020 unless the Environment Agency extends it. After this date you
must comply with your permits.
5. Contact
Environment Agency water company account managers.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
