Understanding the issues of the migrant population- COVID-19 Page 1 of 2
PSYCHOSOCIAL ISSUES AMONG MIGRANTS DURING COVID-19
Migrants are less familiar in their new environment in which they temporarily
live. They are prone to various social, psychological and emotional trauma in such
situations, emanating from fear of neglect by the local community and concerns about
wellbeing and safety of their families waiting in their native places. Migrants are forced
to leave their native places in search of better opportunities and earnings, sometime
leaving behind their families. In many instances, the families in native places depend
partially or entirely on the money sent by the migrant earning members of the family.
During outbreak of communicable diseases, such a COVID-19, and the
restrictions imposed on routine activities as part of social distancing norms to prevent
the spread of the disease, scores of migrant workers tend to move back to their native
places. During the prevailing COVID pandemic also, many migrant workers used all
possible means to reach their destinations. Many of them are however stuck at
borders, including state, district and at national border areas. These are the most
marginalized sections of the society who are dependent on daily wages for their living,
and in times of such distress need sympathy and understanding of the society.
Immediate concerns faced by such migrant workers relate to food, shelter,
healthcare, fear of getting infected or spreading the infection, loss of wages, concerns
about the family, anxiety and fear. Sometimes, they also face harassment and
negative reactions of the local community. All this calls for strong social protection.
As an immediate response, measures to be taken should include, ensuring
community shelters and community kitchens, making other relief material available,
emphasising on the need for social distancing, identification of suspected cases of
infection and adherence to protocols for management of such cases, putting up
mechanisms to enable them reach to the family members through telephone, video
calls etc. and ensuring their physical safety.
Understanding the issues of the migrant population- COVID-19 Page 2 of 2
Migrant workers faced with the situation of spending a few days in temporary
shelters, which may be quarantine centres, while trying to reach to their native places,
are filled with anxieties and fears stemming from various concerns, and are in need of
psycho-social support. As part of such support, following measures can be adopted :
1. Treat everyone migrant worker with dignity, respect, empathy and compassion
2. Listen to their concerns patiently and understand their problems
3. Recognise specific and varied needs for each person/family. There is no
generalisation.
4. Help them to acknowledge that this is an unusual situation of uncertainty and
reassure them that the situation is transient and not going to last long. Normal
life is going to resume soon.
5. Be prepared with all the information about possible sources of help. Inform
them about the support being extended by Central Government, State
Governments/ NGOs/ health care systems etc.
6. Emphasise on the importance of their staying in their present location and how
mass movement could greatly and adversely affect all efforts to contain the
virus.
7. Make them realise their importance in the community and appreciate their
contributions for the society.
8. Remind them that they have made their place with their own efforts, acquired
the trust of their employer, sent remittances to their families and therefor
deserve all respect.
9. Reassure that even if their employer fails them, local administration and
charitable institutions would extend all possible help.
10.Out of desperation, many may react in a manner which may appear insulting.
Try to understand their issues and be patient.
11.If somebody is afraid of getting affected, tell them that the condition is curable,
and that most recover from it.
12.Remind them that it is safer for their families if they themselves stay away from
them.
13.Instead of reflecting any mercy, seek their support in the spirit of winning over
the situation together.
