HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 13th
of April 2020, 28 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,579.
• 50% (1,288) have recovered, 1.5% (40) have died, and 48.5%
(1,251) are receiving treatment. The majority of patients currently in
hospitals have mild symptoms.
• Of the newly reported cases, four were identified in people returning
from outside Thailand. To reduce transmission from imported cases,
all persons returning from other countries will be quarantined in state-
arranged venues.
• An additional three healthcare workers are included in the newly reported cases, bringing the total number
to 102 (4% of all cases). Currently, approximately 50% of these infections are related to patients not
disclosing a history of possible exposure to COVID-19. To protect healthcare workers and the healthcare
system, it is essential that everyone complies with measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
• A total of 18 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed cases, mainly among family
members. Three of the new cases are reported in individuals who either attended crowded places, or whose
work brings them into contact with large numbers of people.
• 68 of 77 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19. The three provinces with
the highest numbers of cases are Bangkok (1306), Phuket (182) and Nonthaburi (148).
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,579 confirmed (28 new)
40 deaths (2 new)
1,251 people hospitalized
102 healthcare staff infected (3
new)
1,288 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 13 April 2020
UPDATE ON MEASURES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH OF THAILAND:
Laboratory and testing capacity
• As of 13th
April, a total of 93 laboratories are certified for COVID-19 testing, including:
 Bangkok and municipality – 43 laboratories (21 public and 22 private)
 Provinces – 50 labs (44 public and 6 private hospital/laboratories)
• As of 10th
April, a total of 100,498 samples were tested for COVID-19. During 4th
-10th
April alone,
approximately 19,000 samples were tested.
KEY MESSAGES FROM THE NEW WHO GUIDANCE ON FACE MASKS IN THE COMMUNITY:
• It is critical that medical masks and respirators be prioritized for health care workers.
• The use of nonmedical masks made of other materials (e.g., cotton fabric) in the community setting
has not been well evaluated. There is no current evidence to make a recommendation for or against
their use in this setting.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health
to support migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
You may have noticed in the news that the number of cases in
Thailand appears to be tapering off.
This is good news but it is not cause for complacency.
We need to ensure that we do not let down our guard: it is vital
that we all continue to follow health advice on hand and
respiratory hygiene as well as physical distancing.
Please watch (and share) our video to remind yourself of the
seven basic steps to keeping yourself and others safe from
COVID-19.
