Most Immediate
No. 25022/42/2047-
Gaverntaent ol India
Ministry of Hume Affairs
Faceigners Division
(Immigration Seetion)

 

Hall No. 48, Open Gallery, Second Mvor, National Stadium,
India Gate, New Delai-40004, Dated- 3.03,2020

OFFICE MEMORANDUM,

.b: Restrictions on international passenger traffic through Land Check Posts
in view of the spread of COVID-49,

‘The unctersigned is directed to refer to the above cited subject and to inform that che
nig decisions of yoversitient shall be implemented with immediate effect in view oF

 

 

 

follo
‘the spreacl of COVID-L9:

4. All lypes uf passenger mavements trough all he Ienmigration Land Cheek Poses
located at Inifo-Rangladesh Borier, Indo-Nepel Border, Indo-Bhutan Border and inde
Myantnar Rorcer will ae suspended with effeec from 0:00 Irs March 75, 2020 till Ferther

orders exenpt through the helow mentianed posts:

 

   

 

 

   

 

 

 

eee | ‘ofthe | Name ofthe land IGP
S.No} "state to remain operational Border
Mi char (Disut,
. Dhubr:) Indo-BD
t Assam Sutarkandi Indo State Govt
Darranga __ Indo-bhutan a abe Gov
2 | ibar Raxaul Indo-Nepal Bol
Meghalaya Inda-bD State Govt,
के oe State Govt,

 

 

State Govt

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Le " =e
tngo-Myeaune =
रण 3 [Tripura Indo-BD. Fall
[oo een | Bol

 

 

® Pradesh Sonouli Indo-Nepal

ar WA.
rectors WA areslnere

 

 
 

 

State G .. कक्ष _ sa 7| पु

 

|? Uttarakhand | panbasa

   

  

| Changrabandha Sate Gort
et |
Cn state Gove
| | | satecon, |
Wuhan
Tdi Bal
[काम wa

 

| ludo-BD Bul |

lug RT] SSG)

| Raniganj

   

SaleGov. |

 

inane]

 

| | Indo-Bhutan State Govt.
Jaiggon

to time (oseapt

Note: ‘The extant visa restrictions an foreigners as amented fron tiny
mentioned Land

Nepalese and Bhutanese nationals) shall apply on all the shave
Inomnigeation Check Posts.

 

2 Paclitipation of fereigners in the border haats shall remain suspended with
immediate effect until further orders,

3 The operation of existing Indo-Bangladesh cross border passenger train and
aspended during the period March t5- April £3, 2020 ae till

 

 

passenger huses shall remain
further orders whichever is earlier

4, Restrictions mentioned in Para-l above on the Inda-Nepal & Indo-Bhutan Borders
d country nationals and not to Indian nationals or nationals

 

slsll be applicable only (or th
‘af Nepal nr Bhutan.

Lraveller

 

3. _ Thera will he intensified health inspectians at all Urese entry poiats and an:
whether Indian or Nepalese or Bhutanese or fram any ather country showing COVID-I9
symptoms or with a recent travel history to one of seven COVID-I9 outbreals countries
namely Italy, Iran, China, Spain, France, Germany and Republic of Korea shall be subjected

‘to quarantine in the appropriate facility of State or Central Government,

 

 

6... All further resiviclios and preventive measures ay stipulated in respect of
don of (ravellers as issued by Ministry of External Atfairs, Ministry of Home

  

 

Page 2 0f3

 
 

Alliies/ Bureau of Imuigeation and Ministry of Health & Vamily Welfure from Une to tine

Shall be followed sit ,

i

7. This sues with he-approval othe competent autheriy fed
Pe

 
 

(Shamim Ahmad)
Under Secretary (Imm)
Yel, No, 0L-23077502
o-mail: shamimakinedmaa.gov.in

 

To

Sh, VK, Yadav, Chairman, Railway Board,
Sh. Rajeev Ranjan Verma, Additional Directoy, 8ureau of Immigration.
Chief Secretaries & Directors General of Police, All States conceraeed

Sh. Lav Agarwel, Joint Secraary, Ministry of Health & Ferily Welfare.

 

 

 

 

Copy te:

Additional Secretary, Minisery of External Affairs
2. Sa, Vikeam Doraiswami, Additional Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs
3, Shs Piyush Srivastava, Join: Secretary, North, Ministry of External Affairs
4, Sh. Deepak Mittal, Joint Secretary, PAL Ministry of Esters Affies

 

2. Sh, Damen Ra

      

Internal Distribution:

LL Sr, PPS to Union Home Secretary
2, Sr. PPS to Secretary Ministry of Health & Family WelFare
3. Sr. PPS to Secretary(Border Management), MHA

Joint Secretary! North-East), MEA

Joint Secretary(Border Manageaent), MHA

Sh, Pankaj Agarvel, Joint Secretary Cabinet Secretariat)

     

4

 

Page 3 of3
