Annexure to Ministry of Home Affairs Order No 40-2/2020-D dated ()24.02.2020

Guidelines on the measures to be taken by Ministries! Departments of
Government of india, Stato/Union Territory Governments and State! Union
Tortitory Authorities for containment of COVID-t9 Epidemic in the Country.

 

4. Offices of he Governmentof India, its Autonomous! Subordinate Offices and Public:
Corporations shall remain clased.
Exceptions:
Defence, cenlral armed police forces, treasury, public utilties (including petroleum,
CNG, LPG, PNG), disaster management, power generation and transmission unils,
post atfices, National informatics Centre, Early Warning Agencies

Offices of the State! Union Tenitory Governments, thelr Autonomous Bodies.
Corporations, ele. shall remain closed,
Exceplions:
a, Police, home guards, civil defence, fire and emergency sarvices, disaster
management, and prisons,
b. District administration and Treasury
०. Electricity, water, sanitation
d. Municipal bocies—Only staff requirad for essential services lke sanitation,
personnel related to water supply atc

 

The above offives (SI. Na 4 & 2) shoul! work with minimum number of employees. AR
other offices may continue to work-fram-home omy.

3. Hospitals and all related medical establishments, including their manufacturing and
distribution units, both in public and private sector, such as dispensaries, chemist
and medical equipment shops, laboratories, elinics, nursing homes, ambulance et.
will continue to remain functional. The transportation for ell medical personnel
nurses, pararmedical staff, other hospital support services be permitted

4, Commercial and private establishments shall be olasad down,
Exceptions:

3. Shops, including ration shops (under PDS), dealing with food, gracerias,
fruits and vegotables. dairy and milk booths, meal and fish, animal fodder.
However, distiict authorities may encourage and faciltate home delivery to
minimize the movement of individuals outside their hares.

Banks, insurancs offices, and ATMs,

Print and electronie media

4d. Telecommunicalions, internet services, broadcasting and cable services. IT
and IT enabled Services only (for essential servicns) and as far as possible
to wark from hame.

@. Delivery of all essential goods including food, charmaceuticals, medical
equipment through E-commerce.

L Fee

 
या न gas retall and storage outst.
Power generation, transmission and distribution units and services,

Capital and debt market services as notifiad by the Securities and Exchange
Board of India

i. Cold storage and warehousing services.

i. Private security services

All olher establishments may warkefrom-hame only,

5. Industrial Establishments wil romain 403०,
Exceptions:
2. Manufacturing units of essential commodities,
b. Production units, which require continuous proce
permission trom the State Government

 

8, after obtaining reculred

6, Alltransport services — air, rail, euadways — will remain suspended.
Exceptions:
a. Transporation for essential goods only.
». Fire, law and order and emergency services.

7. Hospitality Services to remain suspended
Exceptions:

a. Hotels, homostays, lodges and matels, which are accommodating lourisis
and persons stranded due to lockdown, medical and emergency staff, alr
and sea crew.

Establishments usod! sarmarke¢ for quarantine facilities.

8. All educational, vaining, research, coaching institutions etc. shall remain closed.

8. All places of worship shall bo closed for public. No religious congregations will be
permitted, withaut any exception.

 

40.All social! pollical’ sports! entertainment! academic! culturalf religious functions /
gatherings shall be barred,

4. Incase of funerals, congregation of not more than twenty persons willbe permitted

2, All persons who have arrived into India after 48,02.2020, and all such persons wha
have been directed by health care personnel to remain under strict home!
instituioral quarantine for a period as decided by local Health Authorities, falling

ich they will be liable to legal action under Sec. 88 of the IPC.

 

 

43, Whorevor exceplions to above containment measures have been allowed, the
organisationsiemployers must ensure necessary precautions against COVID-I9

हू IN
virus, as well as social distance measures, as advised by the Health Department
from time to time,

 

 

44.In order to implement these containment me the District Magistrate ll
deploy Executive Magistrates 9s Incident Commanders in the respective local
jurisdictions. The Incident Commander will be responsible for the overall
implementation of these measures in their respective jurisdictions. All other line
depariment officials in the specified area will work under the directions of such
Incident commander, The Incident Commander wil issue passes for enabling
essential movemenis as explained,

46.A\ll enforcing authorities lo note that these strict restrictions fundamentally relate to
movement of people, but not to that of assontial goods.

46. The Incident Commanders wil in particular ensure that all efforts for mobilisation
of resources, workers and material for augmentation and expansion of hospital
infrastructure shall continue without any hindrance.

47.Any porson violating these containment measures will bo liable to be procooded
‘againct as per the provisions of Sactian 6 to 60 of tha Disaster Management Act,
2008, besides legal action under Sec. 488 of the IPC {as per Appendix).

48.The above containment measures will ramain in fores. in all parts of the country.

fara poring of 24 days with effect from 25.03.2020,
iar sala)

Union Home Secretary
Appendix

4. Section 54 to 60 of the Disaster Managoment Act, 2005
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

54. Punishmant for obstruction, ete Whoever, without reasoriable caus

 

(a) obstructs any officer or employee of the Central Goverment or the State
Governmont, ar a person authorised by the National Authority ur Slate Aulhority of
District Authority in the discharge of his functions under this Act; or

(b) refuses to comply with any direction given by or on behalf of the Central
Government or the Slate Government or the National Executive Committes or the
State Executive Comrmittes or the District Authority under this Act,

shall on convietion be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
fone year or wilh fing, oF wilh both, and if such ubstruction or refusal to comply with
directions results in loss of lives oF imminent danger thercof, shall on conviction be
punishable with imprisonment for @ term which may extend to twa years.

‘52. Punishment for false claim.—Whoever knowingly makes a clsim which he knows
or has reason to believe to be false for obtaining any relief, assistance, repair,
reconstruction or other benefits consequent to disaster fram any afficer of the Central
Govornmont, the Stale Government, the National Authority, the State Authority or the
District Authority, shall. on conviction be punishable with imprisonment fora term which
may extend to two years, and also with fine.

 

53. Punishment for misappropriation of money or materials, ate —Wvhoaver, being
entrusted with any money or materials, or otherwise being, in custody of, or dominion
over, any money or goods, meant for providing rclicf in any threatoning disaster
situation or disaster, misappropriates or appropriates for his own use or disposes of
such money or materials or any part thereof or wilfully compels any other person so to
do, shall on canviclion be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
+o two years, and also with tna.

 

54, Punishment for false warning —Whoever makes of circulates a false alarm or
‘waming as to disaster orits severity or magnitude, leading to panic, shall on conviction,
bo punishable with imprisonment which may extend (o one year or with fine.

55. Offences by Departments of the Government—(2) Where an offence under this
Act has been committed by any Depariment of the Goverment, the head of the
Depariment shail be deemed to be guity of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punishcd accorcingly uniass he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exereised all due diigence to prevent the
commission of such offence.

{2} Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), where an offence under this
‘Act has been committed by a Department ofthe Government and itis proved that the
tllence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
neglect on the part of, any officar, other than the head of the Deparment, such officer
shall be deemed to be guilly of that offence and shall be lable to be pmcaaded against
and punished accordingly.

56. Fallure of officer In duty or his connivance at the contravention of the
provisions ofthis Act—Any officer, on whom any duty has been imposed by or under
this Act and who ceases ar refuses to perform ar withdraws himself from the duties of
bis office shall, unicss ho has abtained the express written permission of his official
superior or has other lawful excuse for so doing, be punishable with imprisonment for
atorm which may extend to one year or with fine.

 

57. Penalty for contravention of any order regarding requi
person contravenes any order made under sectian 65, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may exiend lo one year or with fine or with both,

 

  

58. Offence by companies.—(t) Where an offence under this Act has been
cornmitted by a company or body corporate, every person who atthe tine the offence
‘was committed, wasin charge of, and was responsible to, the company, forthe conduct
‘of the business of the company, as well as the company, 25 shall be deemac to be
uily ofthe contravention and shall he lable to be pmeneded against and punished
accordingly: Provided that nothing inthis sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised due dligence to prevent the
commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (t)
‘where an offence under this Act has besn committed by @ corspany, and itis proved
that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to
any neglect on the part of any director, manager. seoretary or other officer of the
company, such diractor, manager, secretary or ather officer shall also, he deemed to
be quity of that offence and shall be liable to be procecdod anainst and punished
accordingly.

Explanation. For the purpose of this section— (a) "company" means any body
corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals: and (b) “director”, in
relation to a firm, means  partnar in tha firm.

59. Previous sanction for prosecution. No prosccution for offences punishable
under sections 56 and 56 shall be instituted oxcest with the previous sanction of the
Ceniral Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or of any officer
uthorisad in this behalf, by general or special urder, by such Governmen

 

60. Cognizance of offences. —No court shall take cognizance of an offence under
this Act except on a complaint made by— fa) the National Authority, the State
Authority, the Central Government, the State Goverment, the District Authority or any
‘other authority or officer authorised in this behalf y that Authority or Government. as
the case may be; or (b} any porson who has given notice of not lass than thirty days in
the manner prescribed, of the alleged offence and his intention to make a complaint to

 
the National Authority, the State Authority, the Central Goverment, the State
Government, the District Aulhorily ur any olher authurily oF officer authorised as
aforesaid,

2, Section 488 ॥ The Indlan Penal Code

488. Disobedience to arder duly promulgated by public servant—Whoever, knowing
that, by an order promulgated by a public servant lanfully empowered to promulgate
such order, he is directed to abstain fram a certain act, or to take certain order with
certain property in his possession or under his management. disobeys such direction,
shall, such disobedience causes or tends ta cause obstruction, annoyance or injury,
or tisk of obstruction, annoyance or injury, to any person lawfuly emplayed, be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one manth or with
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both; and if such disobedience
‘causes of trends lo cause danger to human life, health or safely, of causes or tends lo
‘cause a riot or affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either desoription for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or wth both

 

Explanation —It is not necessary that the offender shauld intend to produce harm, or
‘contemplate his disobedience as lkely to produce harm. It's sufficient that he knows
of the order which he disobeys. and that his disobedience produces, or is ikely to
produce, harrn.

Mlustration
An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate such
‘order. directing that a religious procession shall not pass down a certain street. A
knowingly disobays the order, and thereby causes danger of riot. A has committed the
‘offence defined in this section
