Updated Containment Plan for
Large Outbreaks
Novel Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Government of India
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
On 31st
December 2019, the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was
informed of cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology (unknown cause) detected in Wuhan
City, Hubei Province of China. On 7th
January 2020, Chinese authorities identified a new
strain of Coronavirus as the causative agent for the disease. The virus has been renamed by
WHO as SARS-CoV-2 and the disease caused by it as COVID-19. The disease since its first
detection in China has now spread to over 200 countries/territories, As per WHO (asof
15th
April, 2020), there has been a total of 1914916 confirmed cases and 123010 deaths due to
COVID-19 worldwide.
In India, as on 16th
April, 2020, 12759 confirmed cases (including 76 foreign nationals) and
420 deaths reported from 32 States/UTs. Large number of cases has been reported from
Maharashtra, Delhi, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.
1.2. Risk Assessment
COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by WHO on 11th
March, 2020. While earlier the focus
of spread was centered on China, it has now shifted to Europe and North America. WHO has
advised countries to take a whole-of-government, whole-of-society approach, built around a
comprehensive strategy to prevent infections, save lives and minimize impact.
In India also, clusters and large outbreaks have been noted in parts of the country and unless
they are contained in right time, the risk of further spread remains very high.
1.3. Epidemiology
Coronaviruses belong to a large family of viruses, some causing illness in people and others
that circulate among animals, including camels, cats, bats, etc. Rarely, animal corona viruses
may evolve and jump species to infect people and then spread between people as witnessed
during the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS, 2003) and Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome(MERS, 2014).The etiologic agent responsible for current outbreak of
SARS-CoV-2 is a novel coronavirus closely related to SARS-Coronavirus.
In humans, the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 can occur via respiratory secretions (directly
through droplets from coughing or sneezing, or indirectly through contaminated objects or
surfaces as well as close contacts). Nosocomial transmission has been described as an
important driver in the epidemiology of SARS and MERS and has also been documented in
COVID-19.
Current estimates of the incubation period of COVID range from 2-14 days, and these
estimates will be refined as more data become available. Most common symptoms
include fever, fatigue, dry cough and breathing difficulty.
Due to paucity of scientific literature based on community based studies, the available data
on host factors is skewed towards cases requiring hospitalization. As per analysis of the
biggest cohort reported by Chinese CDC, about 81% of the cases are mild, 14% require
hospitalization and 5% require ventilator and critical care management. The deaths reported
are mainly among elderly population particularly those with co-morbidities.
At the time of writing this document, many of the crucial epidemiological information
particularly source of infection, mode of transmission, period of infectivity, etc. are still
under investigation.
2. Strategic Approach
India would be following a scenario based approach for the following possible
scenarios:
i. Travel related case reported in India
ii. Local transmission of COVID-19
iii. Large outbreaks amenable to containment
iv. Wide-spread community Transmission of COVID-19 disease
v. India becomes endemic for COVID-19
2.1. Strategic Approach for Scenario:“Travel related cases reported from India”
(i) Inter-Ministerial coordination (Group of Ministers, Committee of Secretaries) and
Centre-State co-ordination been established.
(ii) Early detection through universal screening of all International passengers at Points of
Entries (PoEs).
(iii) Surveillance and contact tracing through Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme
(IDSP) for tracking travelers in the community who have travelled from affected
countries.
(iv)Early diagnosis through testing samples of suspect cases.
(v) Buffer stock of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) maintained.
(vi)Risk communication for creating awareness among public to follow preventive public
health measures.
2. 2. Local transmission of COVID-2019 disease
Local transmission will lead to clustering of cases in time and space, epidemiologically
linked to a travel related case or a positive case that has links to a travel related case. The
cluster containment strategy will be:
• Extensive contact tracing and active search for cases in containment zone
• Testing all suspect cases and high risk contacts
• Isolating all suspect / confirmed cases and providing medical care.
• Quarantining contacts
• Implementing social distancing measures.
• Intensive risk communication.
2.3 Large outbreaks amenable to containment
The strategy will remain the same as explained in para 2.2 as above but vary in extent
depending upon spread and response to be mounted to contain it. Geographic quarantine and
containment strategy will include:
• Defining area of operation and applying strict perimeter control
• Active search of cases, early isolation, contact listing and tracking, quarantine and
follow up of contacts
• Testing all suspect cases, symptomatic contacts, asymptomatic direct and high-risk
contacts of a confirmed case and SARI cases as per the guidelines issued from time to
time.
• Clinical management based on risk profile
• Social distancing measures
• Administer HCQ in healthcare workers and contacts as per the defined protocol
• Create awareness on hand hygiene, respiratory etiquettes and sanitation
3. Scope of this Document
In alignment with strategic approach, this document provides action that needs to be taken for
containing a large outbreak. The actions for mitigation phase will be dealt separately under a
mitigation plan.
4. Objective
The objective of this plan is to stop the chain of transmission thus reducing the morbidity and
mortality due to COVID-19.
5. Containment for large outbreaks through geographic quarantine
5.1 Large outbreak
A large outbreak is defined as localized increase in the incidence of a COVID-19 cases
occurring within a defined geographic area e.g., in a village, town, or city. This could also
imply progression of a small cluster, earlier noticed for which cluster management action is
under implementation, into multiple clusters. The cases may or may not be epidemiologically
linked. For operational purpose, a large outbreak is deemed to be present when there are 15 or
more cases.
5.2 Geographic quarantine
Geographic quarantine (cordon sanitaire) strategy calls for near absolute interruption of
movement of people to and from a relatively large defined geographic area where there is
single large outbreak or multiple foci of local transmission of COVID-19. In simple terms, it
is a barrier erected around the focus of infection.
Geographic quarantine shall be applicable to such areas reporting large outbreak and/or
multiple clusters of COVID-19 spread over multiple blocks of one or more districts that are
contiguous based on the distribution of cases and contacts.
5.2. Containment of individual clusters within the geographically defined perimeter
The strategy is to contain multiple clusters noted within the outbreak zone. Cluster
Containment Strategy would be to contain the disease within a defined geographic area by
early detection of cases, breaking the chain of transmission and thus preventing its spread to
new areas. This would include geographic quarantine, social distancing measures, enhanced
active surveillance, testing all suspected cases, isolation of cases, quarantine of contacts and
risk communication to create awareness among public on preventive public health measures.
5.3. Evidence for implementing geographic quarantine
In 2009, during the H1N1 Influenza pandemic it was observed that well connected big cities
with substantive population movement were reporting large number of cases, whereas rural
areas and smaller towns with low population densities and relatively poor road/rail/airway
connectivity were reporting only few cases.
The current geographic distribution of COVID-19 mimics the distribution of H1N1 Pandemic
Influenza. This suggests that while the spread of COVID-19in our population could be high,
it’s unlikely that it will be uniformly affecting all parts of the country. This calls for
differential approach to different regions of the country, while mounting a strong containment
effort in hot spots.
Large scale measures to contain COVID-19over large territories have been tried in China.
Mathematical modeling studies have suggested that containment might be possible especially
when other public health interventions are combined with an effective social distancing
strategy.
5.4. Factors affecting large outbreak cluster containment
A number of variables determine the success of the containment operations through
geographic quarantine. These are:
(i) Number and size of the cluster/s.
(ii) Effectiveness of geographic quarantine.
(iii) How efficiently the virus is transmitting in Indian population, taking into account
environmental factors especially temperature and humidity.
(iv) Public health response in terms of active case finding, testing of large number of
cases, immediate isolation of suspect and confirmed cases and quarantine of
contacts.
(v) Geographical characteristics of the area (e.g. accessibility, natural boundaries)
(vi) Population density and their movement (including migrant population).
(vii) Ability to ensure basic infrastructure and essential services.
6. Action Plan for Geographic quarantine
6.1. Legal framework
The Central Government /State Government should review the existing legal instruments that
provide legal support to implement the containment plan. Some of the Acts/ Rules for
consideration could be (i) Disaster Management Act (2005) (ii) Epidemic Act (1897) (iii)
Cr.PC and (iv) State Specific Public Health Act.
The Home Ministry has delegated the powers under DM Act, 2005 [Section 10 sub-section 2
clauses (i) and (l)]to Secretary (Health and Family Welfare) to act in such a way to contain or
control the outbreak. States may invoke the provisions under DM Act, 2005 or under the
Epidemic Act,1897to delegate powers to identified authority to act in such a manner to
control or contain the outbreak.
Indian Penal Code under sections 270provides power to act against those indulging in spread
of disease. Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, when invoked, prohibits gathering
of people.
6.1. Institutional mechanisms and Inter-sectoral Co-ordination
At the Union Government level
6.1.1 The Group of Ministers (GoM) under the Chairmanship of Union Health Minister will
be the apex body to take policy decisions. The GoM will have Ministers of External Affairs,
Civil Aviation, Shipping, Pharmaceuticals, Home Ministry and option for co-opting any other
Ministry. The Union Health Minister will have an advisory Group that will advise him on
way forward. The Public Health Working Group under Secretary (H) and Joint Monitoring
Group under DGHS will provide technical inputs.
6.1.2. At the national level, the Cabinet Secretary/ National Crisis Management Committee
(NCMC) / Committee of Secretaries (CoS)will review the situation across the country and
continue to direct the concerned Ministries to implement its directions. The co-ordination
with health and non-health sectors will be managed by NCMC/ CoS, on issues, flagged by
Ministry of Health.
The scale of arrangement within the Ministry of health will be expanded with additional areas
among the core capacities assigned to various officers. If need be, Empowered group will
take decisions for the core areas of work (planning-co-ordination, surveillance, laboratory
support, hospital preparedness, human resource, logistics and data analysis etc.).
At the State level
6.1.3. The Concerned State will activate State Crisis Management Committee or the State
Disaster Management Authority, as the case may be to manage the clusters of COVID-19.
Institutional arrangement at the operational level
6.1.4. District Collector would be the nodal person for all preparedness and response
activities within his jurisdiction. District Collector will hold regular meetings with health
functionaries, DDMA, Revenue, PWD, Forest, Education and Panchayati Raj/ Local Self
Governance Departments where the containment plan will be finalized and operationalized.
These officials will issue directions to their ground level staff in all aspects of preparedness,
control and containment in accordance with the Containment Plan and Guidelines.
District Collector would need to identify key issues (logistics, legal, technical and resources)
and address them for implementing containment operations. He/she will keep ready all
administrative orders for social distancing, restriction of rail/road/air transport, perimeter
control and continuity of essential services.
In addition, a compendium of all the administrative orders required for enforcing the non-
pharmaceutical interventions would be prepared well in advance and kept ready to be
executed during response phase.
6.2. Trigger for Action
Epidemiological intelligence on increase in the incidence of a COVID-19 cases occurring
within a defined geographic area will be trigger for action. This will be provided by IDSPs
early warning and response (EWAR) system. Routine laboratory based surveillance of SARI
cases is another trigger for action.
6.3. Deployment of Rapid Response Teams (RRT)
Emergency Medical Relief (EMR) division, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will
deploy the Central Rapid Response Team (RRT) to support and advise the State.The State
will deploy itsown State RRT and District RRT.
6.4. Identify area under geographic quarantine
6.4.1 Defining containment and buffer zones:
Boundary for geographic quarantine will be defined based on: (i) geospatial distribution of
each cluster contained within, (ii) largest administrative unit containing all clusters, and (iii)
feasibility to implement strict interruption of movement of people.
This is done by mapping the cases & contacts for defining the area of operation. If data for
mapping is not readily available or could not be mapped immediately, then the below
mentioned criteria will be followed:
• Rural areas:
• Block/Sub district/district population with buffer zone of all neighboring
block/sub district/district
• Urban areas:
• Containment Zone: Entire population of towns and for large cities,
zones/districts from where cases are reported
• Buffer Zone: Neighboring urban/rural districts
The area should be appropriately defined by the district administration/local urban body with
technical inputs at local level & it would be appropriate to err on the higher side.
The buffer zone is an area where new cases are more likely to appear. Thus, the health
institutions, including private institutions, should be aware of the signs & symptoms and
undertake SARI/ and ILI surveillance as per norms.
6.4.2 Perimeter
Perimeter of the geographically quarantinedwill be decided by the State administration based
on criteria defined in Para 6.4.1. Clear entry and exit points will be established. The perimeter
controls that need to be applied is in para 7.4.
Containment Zone
Buffer Zone
6.4.3 Activities in Containment and Buffer zones
Containment Zone Buffer Zone
• Defined area around epicenter
• Perimeter control
• Active search for cases
• Testing of all cases as per sampling
guidelines
• Defined area around the containment
zone
• No perimeter control
• No active search for cases
• ILI/SARI cases report to health
institutions falling in the buffer zone
o Testing of ILI/SARI cases
reporting to health institutions
falling in the buffer zone
7. Surveillance
7.1. Precise mapping of the outbreak shall be carried out.
7.2 The Surveillance activities to be undertaken in the containment zone include:
Active case search will be done through house-to-house visit. For such purpose, a designated
health worker will visit on an average 50 households. The surveillance would be done by
ASHAs, Aaganwadi workers and ANMs. Additional workforce can be drawn from Red
Cross, NSS, NYK, & Ayush students
The surveillance workers (COVID Warriors) will interview the households through a
questionnaire regarding (i) signs, symptoms, (ii) travel history and (iii) history of contact with
a confirmed/suspect COVID-19 case.
These teams will also do line listing of contacts and their tracking. They will also inform their
supervisory officers of cases detected and contacts listed during the day. They will also
collection, collation, daily reports.
7.3. Passive Surveillance shall be enhanced all throughout the area under geographic
quarantine and the buffer zone. All hospitalized patients with Severe Acute Respiratory
Illness shall also be tested for COVID-19 in containment and buffer zones.
7.4. Perimeter Control
The perimeter control will ensure that there is no unchecked outward movement of
population from the containment zone except for maintaining essential services (including
medical emergencies) and government business continuity. Thermal screening, IEC shall be
carried out at all entry and exit points.
All vehicular movement, movement of public transport and personnel movement will be
stopped. All roads including rural roads connecting the containment zone will be guarded by
Police. For personnel and vehicles requiring regular movement, a pass/ID card may be issued
with details recorded and communicated.
The District administration will post signs and create awareness informing public about the
perimeter control. Health workers posted at the exit point will perform screening (e.g.
interview travelers, measure temperature, record the place and duration of intended visit and
keep complete record of intended place of stay).
Details of all persons moving out of perimeter zone for essential/ emergency services will be
recorded and they will be followed up through IDSP. All vehicles moving out of the
perimeter control will be decontaminated with sodium hypochlorite (1%) solution.
8. Laboratory support
8.1 Designated laboratories
The identified VRDL network laboratories and designated private laboratories nearest to the
affected area, will be further strengthened to test samples. The other available govt.
laboratories and private laboratories (BSL 2 following BSL 3 precautions) shall also be
engaged to collect/ test samples, after ensuring quality assurance by ICMR/VRDL network.If
the number of samples exceeds its surge capacity, samples will be shipped to other nearby
laboratories or to NCDC, Delhi or NIV, Pune or to other ICMR lab networks depending upon
geographic proximity.
ICMR testing protocol shall be followed. All test results should be available within 12-24
hours of sampling. ICMR along with the State Government will ensure that there are
designated agencies for sample transportation to identified laboratories. The contact number
of such courier agencies shall be a part of the micro-plan.
The designated laboratory will provide daily update (daily and cumulative) to District, State
and Central Control Rooms on:
i. No. of samples received
ii. No. of samples tested
iii. No. of samples under testing
iv. No. of positive samples
8.2 Testing criteria
Laboratory/s will undertake testing of:
(i) All symptomatic individuals who have undertaken international travel in the last
14 days,
(ii) All symptomatic contacts of lab confirmed cases,
(iii) All symptomatic health care workers,
(iv) All patients with SARI (fever and cough and/or shortness of breath) and
(v) Asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case should be tested
once between day 5 and day 14 of coming in his/her contact.
At any point of time, the testing shall be done as per the testing criteria so enunciated by
ICMR or Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.
9. Hospital care
All suspect/confirmedCOVID-19 cases will be hospitalized and kept in isolation in dedicated
COVID-19 hospitals/hospital blocks. Persons testing positive for COVID-19 will remain
hospitalized till such time as two of their samples are tested negative as per discharge policy.
About 15% of the patients are likely to require hospitalization, and an additional 5 % will
requires critical care and ventilator management.
A three tier arrangement for managing suspect/ confirmed cases will be implemented to
decrease burden on the COVID Block/ hospital.
(i) The mild and very mild cases will be kept in COVID Care Centers which
essentially are temporary makeshift hospital facilities made by converting hotels/
hostel/ guest houses/ stadiums near a COVID-19 hospital. The existing quarantine
facility may also be converted. This will be identified near an existing COVID
hospital/ COVID block.
(ii) Dedicated COVID Health Centers would be identified in existing hospitals. These
centers will have isolation beds with oxygen support for managing moderate
cases, which require monitoring of their clinical status (patients with radiological
evidence of pneumonia).
(iii) Severe cases requiring critical care/intensive care will be managed in Dedicated
COVID Hospitals. Some of the severe cases may progressto respiratory failure
and /or progress to multi-organ failure and hence critical care facility/ dialysis
facility/ and Salvage therapy [Extra Corporeal Membrane Oxygenator(ECMO)]
facility for managing the respiratory/renal complications/ multi-organ failure shall
be required. If such facilities are not available in the containment zone, nearest
tertiary care facility in Government / private sector needs to be identified, that
becomes a part of the plan.
In every hospital fever clinic with triage, holding areas, sampling stations and individual
doctor’s chambers where patients with fever/cough/breathing difficulty will be attended will
be established. Necessary infection prevention and control practices shall be ensured at all
such facilities.
All contacts will be kept in home quarantine except for high risk contacts who would be kept
in facility quarantine.
9.1 Surge capacity
Based on the risk assessment, if the situation so warrants (if data suggests an exponential rise
in the number of cases), the surge capacity of the identified hospitals will be enhanced,
private hospitals shall also be roped in and sites identified for temporary hospitals to be
operationalized.
Surge capacity will also need enhancement in terms of laboratory testing capacity as detailed
in para 8.1 above.
9.2 Pre-hospital care (ambulance facility)
Ambulances need to be in place for transportation of suspect/confirmed cases. Such
ambulances shall be manned by personnel adequately trained in Infection Prevention and
Control (IPC), use of PPE and protocol that needs to be followed for disinfection of
ambulances (by 1% sodium hypochlorite solution using knapsacksprayers).
For any further guidance Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for transporting a
suspect/confirmed case of COVID-19 may be referred to (Available at:
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/StandardOperatingProcedureSOPfortransportingasuspectorco
nfirmedcaseofCOVID19.pdf)
9.3 Infection Prevention Control Practices
Health care associated infectionsamong attending healthcare personnel are well documented
in the current COVID-19 outbreak. There shall be strict adherence to Infection prevention
control (IPC) practices in all health facilities. IPC committees would be formed (if not
already in place. The designated hospitals will ensure that all healthcare staff is trained in
washing of hands, respiratory etiquettes, donning/doffing& proper disposal of PPEs and bio-
medical waste management.
At all times doctors, nurses and para-medics working in the clinical areas will wear three
layered surgical mask and gloves. The medical personnel working in isolation and critical
care facilities where aerozolisation is anticipated, will wear full complement of PPE
(including N95 masks).
The support staff engaged in cleaning and disinfection will also wear full complement of
PPE. Environmental cleaning should be done twice daily and consist of damp dusting and
floor mopping with Lysol or other phenolic disinfectants and cleaning of commonly touched
surfaces with sodium hypochlorite solution.
Detailed guidelines available MoHFW’s website on
(i) Infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities,
(ii) Rational use of Personal Protective Equipment,
may be referred to.
All healthcare workers must be advised to self-monitor their health and report any breach in
IPC practices or occurrence of any illness.
10. Clinical management
10.1. Clinical Management
The hospitalized cases may require symptomatic treatment for fever. Paracetamol is the drug
of choice. Suspect cases with co-morbid conditions, if any, will require appropriate
management of co-morbid conditions.
For patients with Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI), having respiratory distress may
require, pulse oxymetry, oxygen therapy, non-invasive and invasive ventilator therapy.
Detailed guidelines available on MoHFW’s website and updated from time to time, may be
followed.
Doctors managing severe COVID cases may contact AIIMS, Delhi (helpline - 9971876591)
or through tele-medicine network to seek guidance for management of severe cases.
10.2. Discharge Policy
Discharge policy for suspected cases of COVID-19 tested negative will be based on the
clinical assessment of the treating physician. For those tested positive for COVID-19, their
discharge from hospital will be based onconsecutive two samples tested negative and the
patient is free from symptoms.
11. Psychosocial support
Quarantine, isolation and being affected by a new disease, all can be very stressful for those
involved and for their family members. Social distancing measures that force one to stay at
home and resulting social isolation can be frustrating. This apart, the healthcare workers
working under the fear of an unknown disease,under stressful and demanding situations,
impact their mental well-being. A guidance note on dealing with various mental issues is
available at: https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/MindingourmindsduringCoronaeditedat.pdf.
The National Institute of Mental Health and NeuroSciences (NIMHANS) will be the nodal
agency to plan and execute psycho-social support. NIHMANS will prepare a Psycho-Social
Support plan and implement the same in the COVID affected areas.
12. Pharmaceutical interventions
As of now there is no approved specific drug or vaccine for cure or prevention of COVID-19.
However, Hydroxychloroquine has been recommended as chemoprophylaxis drug for use by
asymptomatic healthcare workers managing COVID-19 cases and asymptomatic contacts of
confirmed COVID-19 cases under medical supervision.
Advisory issued by ICMR in this regard is available at:
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/AdvisoryontheuseofHydroxychloroquinasprophylaxisforSAR
SCoV2infection.pdf).
Contacts and healthcare workers receiving Hydroxychloroquine as chemoprophylaxis will be
informed to report any untoward health event to nearest health facility.
In addition, a combination of Hydroxychloroquine and Azithromycin has been advocated for
use in severe cases of COVID-19 under medical supervision.
Guideline on clinical management protocol of COVID-19 is available at:
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/RevisedNationalClinicalManagementGuidelineforCOVID193
1032020.pdf
13. Non-Pharmaceutical interventions
In the absence of proven drug or vaccine, non-pharmaceutical interventions will be the main
stay for containment of COVID-19 cluster.
13.1. Preventive public health measures
There will be intensive social mobilizationamong the population in geographic quarantine
zone for adoption of community-wide practice of frequent washing of hands and respiratory
etiquettes. The community will also be encouraged to self-monitor their health and report to
the ASHA/Anganwadi worker visiting home or to nearest health facility.
13.2. Quarantine and isolation
Quarantine and Isolation are important mainstay of cluster containment. These measures help
by breaking the chain of transmission in the community.
13.2.1. Quarantine
Quarantine refers to separation of individuals who are not yet ill but have been exposed to
COVID-19 and therefore have a potential to become ill. There will be home quarantine/
facility quarantine of contacts of suspect /confirmed cases. The guideline on home quarantine
available on the website of the Ministry provides detailed guidance on home quarantine.
The contacts advised quarantine will undergo risk profiling. Those above 60 or with co-
morbidities will be shifted to designated quarantine facility. This will help identify early
development of symptoms among them, their testing and shifting to isolation facility under
para 9.
13.2.2. Isolation
Isolation refers to separation of individuals who are ill and suspected or confirmed of
COVID-19. There are various modalities of isolating a patient. Ideally, patients can be
isolated in individual isolation rooms.
In resource constrained settings, all positive COVID-19 cases can be cohorted in a ward with
good ventilation. All suspect cases could also be cohorted in a separate ward. However, under
no circumstances these cases should be mixed up.
The COVID Care Centers/Dedicated COVID Centers and Dedicated COVID Hospitals will
all have separate facilities to keep suspect and confirmed cases.
A minimum distance of 1 meter needs to be maintained between adjacent beds. All such
patients need to wear a triple layer surgical mask at all times.
13.3 Social distancing measures
For the cluster containment, social distancing measures are key interventions to rapidly
curtail the community transmission of COVID-19 by limiting interaction between infected
persons and susceptible hosts. The following measures would be taken:
13.3.1 Closure of schools, colleges and work places
Administrative orders will be issued to close schools, colleges and work places in
containment and buffer zones.
Intensive risk communication campaign will be followed to encourage all persons to stay
indoors for an initial period of 28 days, to be extended based on the risk assessment.
Based on the risk assessment and indication of successful containment operations, an
approach of staggered work and market hours may be put into practice.
13.3.2 Cancellation of mass gatherings
All mass gathering events and meetings in public or private places, in the containment and
buffer zones shall be cancelled/banned till such time as the area is declared to be free of
COVID-19.
13.3.3. Advisory to avoid public places
The public in the containment and buffer zones will be advised to avoid public places and
only shall be allowed for attending to essential services.The administration will ensure supply
of enough triple layer masks to the households in the containment and buffer zones to be
distributed through visiting surveillance teams.
13.3.4. Cancellation of public transport (bus/rail)
There will be prohibition for persons entering the geographic quarantine and on persons
exiting the geographic quarantine zone. To facilitate this, if there are major bus transit hubs
or railway stations in the containment zone, the same would be made dysfunctional
temporarily. Additionally, irrespective of the fact that there is a rail/road transit hub, the
perimeter control will take care of prohibiting people exiting the containment zone including
those using private vehicles and taxies.
As a significant inconvenience is caused to the public by adopting these measures in the
containment zone, State government would proactively engage the community and work with
them to make them understand the benefits of such measures.
13.3.5. Enforcement of Geographic quarantine.
The perimeter control and movement of vehicles within the containment zone will be
prohibited except for those (identified through special passes) earmarked for providing
essential services. Police check-posts at prominent locations will check vehicles and give
necessary guidance by police. Those found defaulting of Government orders will be
prosecuted.
14. Material Logistics
14.1. Personal Protective Equipment
The type of personal protective equipment for different categories of:
S. No. Name of the
item
Category of personnel
1 PPE Kit,N 95,
Mask, Gloves,
• Doctors and nurses attending to patients in isolation, ICU/
critical care facilities of hospitals in the containment zone.
Goggles, cap
and shoe
cover )
• Para-medical staff in the back cabin of ambulance performing
interventional lifesaving maneuvers.
• Those working in laboratories or collecting sample
2 N-95 Mask
and gloves
• Supervisory doctors verifying a suspect case
• Doctors/nurses attending patients in Screening fever clinics/
respiratory clinics / primary health care facilities
3 Triple Layer
Surgical mask
• To be used by Field workers doing surveillance work
• Staff providing essential services.
• Suspect cases and care giver / by stander of the suspect case
• Security staff.
• Ambulance drivers
The State Government has to ensure adequate stock of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).
The quantity required for a containment operation will depend upon the size and extent of the
clusters within the large outbreak and the time required for containing it. States will also
ensure that the PPE are being used in accordance with the guidelines on rational use of PPE.
14.2. Transportation
A large number of vehicles will be required for mobilizing the surveillance and supervisory
teams. The vehicles will be pooled from all Government departments. The shortfall, if any,
will be met by hiring of vehicles.
14.3. Stay arrangements for the field staff
The field staff brought in for the surveillance activities and that for providing perimeter
control need to be accommodated within the containment zone. Facilities such as schools,
community buildings, etc. will be identified for sheltering. Catering arrangement will have to
be made at these locations.
14.4 Bio-medical waste management
A large quantity of bio-medical waste is expected to be generated from containment zone.
Arrangement would also be required for such bio-medical waste (discarded PPEs, etc.),
preferably by utilizing the bio-medical waste management services at the designated hospital.
15. Risk communication
15.1 Risk communication material
Risk communication materials [comprising: (i) posters and pamphlets (ii) audio only
material (iii) AV films (prepared by PIB/MoHFW)] will be prepared and kept ready for
targeted roll out in the entire geographic quarantine zone.
15.2 Communication channels
15.2.1 Interpersonal communication
During house to house surveillance, ASHAs/ other community health workers will interact
with the community for:
(i) Reporting symptomatic cases
(ii) Contact tracing
(iii) Information on preventive public health measures.
15.2.2 Mass communication
Awareness will be created among the community through miking, distribution of pamphlets,
mass SMS and social media. Also use of radio and television (using local channels) will
ensure penetration of health messages in the target community.
15.2.3 Dedicated helpline
A dedicated helpline number will be provided at the Control Room (District Headquarter)
and its number will be widely circulated for providing general population with information
on risks of COVID-19 transmission, the preventive measures required and the need for
prompt reporting to health facilities, availability of essential services and administrative
orders on perimeter control.
15.2.4 Media Management
At the Central level, only Secretary (H) or representative nominated by her shall address the
media. At the State level, only Principal Secretary (H), his/her nominee will speak to the
media. At the District level DM/DC will address the media.
There will be regular press briefings/ press releases to keep media updated on the
developments and avoid stigmatization of affected communities. Every effort shall be made
to address and dispel any misinformation circulating in media including social media.
16. Information Management
16.1 Control room at State &District Headquarters
A Control Room (if not already in place) shall be set up at State and District headquarters.
This shall be manned by State and District Surveillance Officer (respectively) under which
data managers (deployed from IDSP/ NHM) responsible for collecting, collating and
analyzing data from field and health facilities.
Daily situation reports shall be sent to state government and central government without fail
providing aggregate data on daily basis on the following (for the day and cumulative):
i. Total number of suspect cases
ii. Total number of confirmed cases
iii. Total number of critical cases on ventilator
iv. Total number of deaths
v. Total number of contacts under surveillance
Districts/State Government shall provide the required details through an online portal
developed for the same by MOHFW.
16.2 Control Room in the geographic quarantine zone
A Control Room shall be set up inside the geographic quarantine zone to facilitate collection,
collation and dissemination of data from various field units to District and State Control
Rooms. This shall be manned by an epidemiologist under which data managers (deployed
from IDSP/ NHM) will be responsible for collecting, collating and analyzing data from field
and health facilities.
This Control Room will provide daily input to the District Control Room for preparation of
daily situation report.
16.3 Alerting the neighboring Districts/States
The Control Room at State Government Headquarters will alert all neighboring Districts.
There shall be enhanced surveillance in all such Districts for detection of clustering of
symptomatic illness. Awareness will be created in the community for them to report
symptomatic cases/contacts.
Also suitable provisions shall be created for enhancing horizontal communication between
adjacent districts, especially for contact tracing exercise and follow up of persons exiting the
containment zone.
17. Capacity building
It is expected that in such circumstances, large human resource requirement will be there to
manage: (i) Field activities including surveillance, (ii) Clinical care at hospitals, (iii)
laboratory testing and (iv) support staff to provide support services.
17.1 Training content
Trainings will be designed to suit requirement of each and every section of healthcare worker
involved in the containment operations. These trainings for different target groups shall
cover:
1. Field surveillance, contact tracing, data management and reporting
2. Surveillance at designated exit points from the containment zone
3. Sampling, packaging and shipment of specimen
4. Hospital infection prevention and control including use of appropriate PPEsand bio-
medical waste management
5. Clinical care of suspect and confirmed cases including ventilator management,
critical care management
6. Risk communication to general community and health service providers
17.2 Target trainee population
Various sections of healthcare workforce (including specialist doctors, medical officers,
nurses, ANMs, Block Extension Educators, MHWs, ASHAs) and workforce from non-health
sector (security personnel, Anganwadi Workers, support staff etc.) will be trained. A
normative guidance is as under:
• Trained health workforce for surveillance – ANM, AASHA, Anganwadi, NSS, Red
Cross, Ayush students and NYK Volunteers
• Trained supervisory field staff – PHC, Ayush and CHC doctors
• For COVID Care Center – AYUSH doctors
• For Dedicated COVID Health Center – PHC doctors
• For Dedicated COVID Hospitals – Training will be imparted on clinical and
ventilatory management - Respiratory physicians, anaesthetists, intensivists, MBBS
doctors who have handled ventilators, including DNB and MD students drawn from
medical college/private hospitals.
District-wise trained manpower made available on dashboard of MoHFW and all training
material made available on IGOT platform
Orientation training will be conducted by the RRT a day prior to containment operations are
initiated.
17.3 Replication of training in other Districts
The State Govt. will ensure that unaffected Districts are also trained along the same lines so
as to strengthen the core capacities of their RRTs, doctors, nurses, support staff and non-
health field formations. These trainings should be accompanied with functional training
exercises like mock-drills.
18. Financing of containment operations
The fund requirement would be estimated taking into account the scale of operations and
funds will be made available to the district collector from NHM flexi-fund. The SDRF funds
can also be used as per notification issued by Ministry of Home Affairs.
19. Scaling down of operations
The operations will be scaled down if no secondary laboratory confirmed COVID-19 case is
reported from the geographic quarantine zone for at least four weeks after the last confirmed
test has been isolated and all his contacts have been followed up for 28 days. A containment
operation (large outbreak or cluster) is deemed to be over 28 days from the date the last case
in the containment zone tests negative.
The closing of the surveillance for the clusters could be independent of one another provided
there is no geographic continuity between clusters. However the surveillance will continue
for ILI/SARI.
States shall ensure that all required steps are taken to contain clusters within the large
outbreak and chain of transmission is broken.
