Self referral portal
24th April 2020
User guide for essential workers to book a test at a regional testing site or
via home delivery
Contents
2
Programme context 3
What is the self referral portal? 4
How will self referral work for regional testing sites? 5
How will self referral work for home testing? 6
How to choose a testing route 7
Regional testing site: step by step guidance
How to register for a test at a regional testing site 13
How to book an appointment at a regional testing site 18
How to order a home test kit 28
Frequently asked questions 36
The Coronavirus National Testing Programme
The coronavirus pandemic presents a critical national challenge and testing for the virus is a central part of the Government’s response. One of the most
challenging things about coronavirus is the uncertainty. Good-quality testing can help provide us with greater certainty. It’s a big part of how we’re going to
defeat this disease.
Our response so far:
As part of the government’s 5-pillar strategy for coronavirus testing, we are testing essential workers who have coronavirus-like symptoms to see if they
currently have the virus. Our aim is that anyone who needs such a test will be able to have one.
We are establishing a nation-wide network of drive-through regional testing sites, which eligible essential workers are able to use. We are also in the
process of rolling out a limited number of home test deliveries.
Self Referral Portal:
From today we are launching a new self referral portal here www.gov.uk/coronavirus
essential workers will be able to register and book a test for themselves and/ or their household member(s) if they have coronavirus-like symptoms.
There are two ways to get a test:
1) Book an appointment at a regional testing site
2) Request a home delivery test
3
What is the self referral portal?
• The self referral portal allows essential workers who are self-isolating either because they or member(s) of
their household have coronavirus-like symptoms, to register to be tested.
• It is a secure portal for essential workers to register their details and book a coronavirus test. There are two
ways to get a test:
1) Regional testing site
2) Home delivery
• Initially, numbers will be limited for the home delivery route. This will increase over the next few weeks.
4
How will self referral work for regional testing sites?
1. The essential worker will click on the link and register either their details (if they have symptoms) or household
member(s) with coronavirus-like symptoms. The essential worker or household member(s) will be added to a list
and depending on capacity at regional testing sites, will be invited to book an appointment for a test.
2. The individual(s) being tested will receive a text message inviting them to book an appointment. The text
message will contain a link to the appointment booking system and a unique 16 digit code.
3. The individual will click on the text message link and be directed to the appointment booking system where they
will be asked to enter their unique 16 digit code. They will then be able to book a specific appointment for a
coronavirus test at a regional testing site.
4. The individual will receive a confirmation of their appointment via text message and email. These will contain a
QR code, which will need to be shown to security at the regional testing site. Only one QR code is required,
either on a smartphone or a printed copy of the email.
The following steps outline how essential workers and their household member(s) can arrange a coronavirus test at a
regional testing site:
5
How will self referral work for home testing?
The following steps outline how essential workers and their household members can arrange for a coronavirus
test(s) to be delivered to their home
1. The essential worker will click on the link and register their details, via the online self referral portal. These details
will be used to verify the identity of the essential worker before they order their test(s) for delivery. If the essential
worker has access to their work email they should use this to support with the verification process.
2. The essential worker will then receive an email with a one-time code. If the email address cannot be verified we
will need them to complete a short verification check through TransUnion. Alternatively, the essential worker can
choose to apply for a test at a drive-through centre.
3. The essential worker will then be able to request up to five tests for members of their household displaying
symptoms of the coronavirus. Order details should then be reviewed and confirmed.
4. The individual will receive a confirmation of their order by email, as well as details of what to do next. Tracking
details for their delivery will also be provided. Once the individual receives their test kit they should follow the
instructions provided.
6
How to choose a testing route
Process overview for choosing a testing route
Below is an overview of the process that individuals with coronavirus-like symptoms should take in order to choose a
testing route via the self referral portal:
These steps are laid out in the following slides, with accompanying screenshots
3 Once you've selected a testing route, you can complete registration
1 Enter the self referral portal and check eligibility
2 Confirm who is being tested and choose a testing route
8
1. Enter the self referral portal and check eligibility
1. Go to the self referral portal by entering the following web address into your web browser (do not use Internet Explorer to access):
www.gov.uk/coronavirus
Please read the information provided on the self referral portal landing page.
• Only essential workers and their household member(s) should proceed to
register for coronavirus testing.
Click ‘Start now’ to continue to registration.
B
Check to see if you or your
household member(s) are eligible
for taking a coronavirus test.
Click ‘Ok, I qualify’ to continue to
registration.
C
A
9
2. Confirm who is being tested and how
Select the option that best describes your current situation, outlining who will
require coronavirus testing.
Choose to register for a coronavirus test for either:
• A essential worker or
• essential worker householder member(s)
The individual ordering the coronavirus test should continue with registration
Click ‘Save and continue’.
Choose where the individual(s) would like to take the coronavirus test, either at
a testing site or at home via a home test kit.
Once selected, click ‘Save and continue’.
D
E
10
If you choose the regional testing site route go
to slide 12
If you choose the home testing route go to
slide 28
Regional testing site: step by step guidance
How to register for a test at a regional testing
site
Process overview for regional testing site registration
Below is an overview of the process that essential workers should take in order to register for a coronavirus test via the self
referral portal:
These steps are laid out in the following slides, with accompanying screenshots
1 Register personal details (for the individual being tested)
3 Receive an invitation to book an appointment
2 Verify details and submit registration
14
1. Register personal details (for the individual being tested)
Enter the individual’s first and
last name
Click ‘Save and continue’
Enter the individual’s mobile
number
Click ‘Save and continue’
Enter the individual’s employer
Click ‘Save and continue’
A
C
B
15
2. Verify details and submit registration
Check that the information entered for the
individual is correct.
Click ‘Submit application’ when ready to
submit registration.
A confirmation of the individual’s application is shown.
NEXT STEPS:
Look out for a text message with an invitation to book an appointment for testing.
All registrations will be shortlisted for testing and when capacity at testing sites
allows, text message for appointment booking will be sent. This could be
immediately or in a few days depending on capacity.
D
E
16
• The individual will receive a text message from
UK_Gov to invite them to book a specific
appointment at a regional testing site.
• The individual will click the text message link and
enter their unique 16 digit code to access the
appointment booking system.
.
3. Receive an invitation to book an appointment
17
How to book an appointment at a regional
testing site
Process overview for booking an appointment
3 Enter NHS number, if applicable
1 Access the appointment booking portal
5 Choose a regional testing site and time to be tested
2 Enter personal details for the individual being tested
4 Add household member(s) to the booking
6 Verify details and submit appointment booking
These steps are laid out in the following slides, with accompanying screenshots
7 Receive appointment confirmation email and text message
Below is an overview of the process that essential workers should take in order to book an appointment for a
coronavirus test at a regional testing site:
19
1. Access the appointment booking portal
Read the information on the appointment booking page. Check you understand:
• Who is eligible for a test
• What happens at a regional testing site
• The information that you need to complete your appointment booking
Click ‘Start now’ to begin your appointment booking registration
Input your unique 16 digit number.
This can be found on the text
message sent, inviting you to book
an appointment
A
B
20
2. Enter personal details for the individual being tested
Enter the individual’s personal details:
C. Car registration
D. Date of birth
E. Name and gender
F. Email address
G. Mobile number
Click ‘Save and continue’ to progress
through the appointment booking
C
F
E
D
G
21
3. Enter NHS number, if applicable
Enter the individual’s NHS number, if applicable.
Click ‘Save and continue’ to progress through the
appointment booking system.
H
I
22
4. Add household member(s) to the booking
An individual (adult or child aged 5 or
over) with coronavirus symptoms living in
the same household as a essential worker
can be invited for testing.
Check the eligibility for testing before
booking anyone for a test.
If only the essential worker registered
needs a test, proceed to appointment
booking by clicking on ‘Book appointment’
Provide personal details of the
household member(s), information
required:
• Name and gender
• Date of birth
• Email address
• Mobile number
Check the information provided for
household members is correct.
Click ‘Save and continue’ to progress to
the appointment booking.
J
K
23
5. Choose a regional testing site and time to be tested
Enter your post code to find a regional
testing site near home.
Click ‘Find site’
Choose from the list of regional testing
sites available. Click ‘See available times’
Select a time for an appointment
Click ‘Save and continue’
L M N
24
6. Verify details and submit appointment booking
Check that the information entered is
correct.
Click ‘Confirm appointment’ when ready to
confirm the appointment.
A confirmation of the individual’s
appointment booking is shown.
NEXT STEPS:
A text message and email will be sent to
each individual confirming the
appointment booking. The email and text
message will contain a QR code which will
need to be shown to security when
entering the regional testing site.
O
P
25
• Individuals who have successfully booked a
specific slot at a testing site will receive an email
and text confirmation.
• Individuals will need to bring the QR code, either
on their smartphone or printout of the email, to
their coronavirus test appointment.
• Security will ask to see the QR code at the testing
site gate.
• The QR code will also be scanned and attributed
to the individual’s coronavirus test.
.
7. Receive appointment confirmation email and text
message
26
Home testing: step by step guidance
How to order a home test kit
How to order a home test kit
3 Verify essential worker email address
1 Access the home kit ordering portal
5 Provide details for ordering home testing kit(s)
2 Enter essential worker personal details
4 Verify essential worker identity
6 Receive order confirmation details
These steps are laid out in the following slides, with accompanying screenshots
Below is an overview of the process that essential workers should take in order to request order testing kits for home
delivery:
29
1. Access the home kit ordering portal
Read the information on the home testing booking page:
• Who is eligible for a test, including the guidance for different age
groups
• Key information needed to complete the home test kit ordering
process:
• A work or personal email address that you can access and
check regularly
• National Insurance Number
Click ‘Start now’ to begin the Home Test Kit ordering process
A
30
2. Enter essential worker personal details
B
Enter the essential worker’s personal details:
Name
Date of birth
Address where you are self-isolating
National Insurance Number
Mobile number
Email address (work email if accessible)
Click ‘Continue’ to progress through the home test booking
process
31
3. Verify essential worker email address
I
C
Click send code to receive a one-
time email passcode
Locate the one-time password sent to
your chosen email address
D
E
Enter the one-time code and click
'Confirm and continue'
We'll send a confirmation code to Bsmithlonglonglong@email.co.uk
To continue, you must confirm your email address.
Dear Bob Smith
We sent a confirmation code to Bsmithlonglonglong@email.co.uk
Enter the code to continue
32
4. Verify critical worker identity
Click continue to proceed to the
TransUnion Service or to book a drive-
through test
If we are not able to confirm critical worker
details, we will need to complete a short
verification through the TransUnion Service.
Alternatively, the critical worker can choose to
apply for a test at a drive-through centre if they
do not wish to complete the identity verification
check
If we cannot verify critical worker
details they will still be able to book a
test by clicking next and returning to
the drive-through test centre option
F
33
G
5. Provide details for ordering home testing kit(s)
H I
A essential worker can request up to 5
test kits for members of their
household who are displaying
symptoms of coronavirus
Note the age-related guidance relating
to test administration
Add additional names by clicking the
'add person' button. When all
individual's details have been
included click continue to view the
order summary
Review the Order Summary, ensuring
the details are correct.
Read and confirm your understanding
of the Terms and Conditions by
clicking here Place the order by
clicking here
Bob Smith
Bsmithlonglonglong@email.co.uk
07771 900 900
34
6. Receive order confirmation details
J
The essential worker will be presented with a
confirmation of their order
Once completed, we will send a confirmation
email including details on next steps
We will also send a separate e-mail containing
tracking information for the order
Please take note of the instructions
on the confirmation page.
It is important to read carefully the
detailed instructions included in the
home test kit(s) when it arrives
K
35
Frequently asked questions
Frequently asked questions
Eligibility for testing
For further guidance and advice, please visit: www.gov.uk/coronavirus-get-tested
Coronavirus Testing Helpdesk: 0300 303 2713
To meet the testing criteria you must either be:
• An individual (adult or child) with coronavirus symptoms living in the same household as a essential worker
OR
• An essential worker, with coronavirus symptoms.
In addition, you should be in the first three days of the onset of your coronavirus symptoms at the time the swab is taken - although testing is considered
effective up until day five.
No testing should be undertaken after day five, unless it’s for a specific reason agreed on a case by case basis by local microbiologists.
37
