Suggested citation: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Contact tracing: public health management of
persons, including healthcare workers, having had contact with COVID-19 cases in the European Union – second update, 8
April 2020. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020.
© European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, 2020
si
TECHNICAL REPORT
Contact tracing: public health management of
persons, including healthcare workers, having
had contact with COVID-19 cases in the European
Union – second update
8 April 2020
Background
This document outlines the key steps of contact tracing, including contact identification, listing and follow-up, in
the context of the COVID-19 response.
Contact management is based on the latest available evidence, as outlined below.
• Current estimates suggest a median incubation period from five to six days, with a range from 1 to 14
days. A recent modelling study confirmed that it remains prudent to consider an incubation period of up
to 14 days [1,2].
• A case may already be infectious up to 48 hours before the onset of symptoms. A recent study reported
that 12.6% of case reports indicated pre-symptomatic transmission [3]. In addition, the proportion of pre-
symptomatic transmission has been inferred through modelling and was estimated to be – in the presence
of control measures – at around 48% and 62% in Singapore and China (Tianjin data), respectively [4].
Other studies have shown no significant difference in viral load in asymptomatic and symptomatic
patients, indicating the potential of virus transmission from asymptomatic patients [5-7].
• Transmission is believed to be mainly via respiratory droplets and direct contact with infected people, and
indirect contact with surfaces or objects in the immediate environment [8]. Recent experimental studies
carried out under highly controlled conditions have demonstrated the survival of SARS-CoV-2 on different
surfaces as well as in aerosol. Different levels of environmental contamination have been described in
rooms of COVID-19 patients [9-11].
• Up to 10% of reported cases in China [12] and up to 9% of cases in Italy were among healthcare workers
[13]. It is likely that nosocomial outbreaks play an important role in amplifying local outbreaks, and they
disproportionately affect elderly and vulnerable populations.
Scope of this document
This document aims to help EU/EEA public health authorities in the tracing and management of persons,
including healthcare workers, who had contact with COVID-19 cases. It should be implemented in combination
with non-pharmaceutical measures as appropriate [14].
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
2
Purpose of contact tracing
The purpose of identifying and managing the contacts of probable or confirmed COVID-19 cases is to rapidly
identify secondary cases that may arise after transmission from the primary known cases in order to intervene
and interrupt further onward transmission. This is achieved through:
• the prompt identification of contacts of a probable or confirmed case of COVID-19;
• providing contacts with information on self-quarantine, proper hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette
measures, and advice around what to do if they develop symptoms;
• timely laboratory testing for all those with symptoms.
Contact tracing is an essential measure to fight the ongoing epidemic of COVID-19, in conjunction with active
case finding and testing, and in synergy with other measures such as physical distancing. Each country will need
to adapt their response to the local epidemiological situation and according to available resources. The rigorous
application of contact tracing measures during the period when only sporadic cases are being observed can
reduce further transmission and have a major impact on the spread of the outbreak. However, if resources allow,
it should also be considered for application in geographical locations of more widespread transmission. Even if
not all contacts of each case are identified and traced, contact tracing can still contribute to reducing
transmission in combination with other measures such as physical distancing [15-17].
Emerging evidence from the response in China and Singapore has indicated that efficient contact tracing helped
reduce the time from symptom onset to isolation, and may have substantially reduced the likelihood of ongoing
transmission [18,19]. Contact tracing and quarantine have also been used during periods of widespread
transmission in Wuhan and South Korea, together with a range of other measures [12,20]. Contact tracing also
contributes to better understanding of the epidemiology of COVID-19.
Countries in the EU/EEA that still have a limited number of cases should focus their public health efforts on
identifying cases and tracing their contacts.
In countries with widespread transmission in some regions but limited transmission in others, contact tracing
plays a key role in containing the outbreak in these lesser affected areas and within closed settings (e.g. prisons,
nursing homes). Contact tracing should still be considered in areas of more widespread transmission, wherever
possible, and in conjunction with physical distancing measures. If resources are limited, high-risk exposure
contacts of each case (close contacts) and contacts who are healthcare workers or work with vulnerable
populations should be traced first, followed by as many low-risk exposure contacts as possible [21]. In areas with
widespread virus circulation, contact tracing should include at least cases appearing in specific settings such as
long-term care facilities, prisons, refugee camps, etc., to reduce transmission and mitigate the impact on
vulnerable populations. Furthermore, contact tracing should be performed if the case is a HCW, and it should
focus on hospital or general practice contacts, to rapidly identify potentially vulnerable exposed individuals.
However, even if not implemented for all cases when widespread transmission is observed, contact tracing has to
be implemented extensively as soon as community transmission decreases.
For countries that have had enforced strict physical distancing measures for a period of time in order to
attempt to interrupt the chain of transmission of the virus, case finding measures, including contact tracing, are a
priority once the physical distancing measures are lifted, in order to reduce the risk of further escalation.
During lockdown periods, countries should aim to review existing public health systems to determine the optimal
implementation and timing of reinforced contact tracing measures.
ECDC has published a technical report on the resources required for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring
activities [21]. At the end of this document some resource-saving measures are outlined.
Definition of the term ‘contact person’
A contact of a COVID-19 case is any person who has had contact with a COVID-19 case (Table 1) within a
timeframe ranging from 48 hours before the onset of symptoms of the case to 14 days after the onset of
symptoms.
If the case had no symptoms, a contact person is defined as someone who has had contact with the case within
a timeframe ranging from 48 hours before the sample which led to confirmation was taken, to 14 days after the
sample was taken.
The associated risk of infection depends on the level of exposure, which will, in turn, determine the type of
management and monitoring (Table 1) [22].
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
3
Table 1. Classification of contact based on level of exposure
High-risk exposure
(close contact)
Low-risk exposure
A person:
 having had face-to-face contact with a COVID-19 case within two metres for
more than 15 minutes;
 having had physical contact with a COVID-19 case;
 having unprotected direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19
case (e.g. being coughed on);
 who was in a closed environment (e.g. household, classroom, meeting room,
hospital waiting room, etc.) with a COVID-19 case for more than 15 minutes;
 in an aircraft, sitting within two seats (in any direction) of the COVID-19
case, travel companions or persons providing care, and crew members
serving in the section of the aircraft where the index case was seated [23] (if
severity of symptoms or movement of the case indicate more extensive
exposure, passengers seated in the entire section or all passengers on the
aircraft may be considered close contacts);
 A healthcare worker or other person providing care to a COVID-19 case, or
laboratory workers handling specimens from a COVID-19 case, without
recommended PPE or with a possible breach of PPE [24].
A person:
 having had face-to-face contact with a
COVID-19 case within two metres for less
than 15 minutes;
 who was in a closed environment with a
COVID-19 case for less than 15 minutes;
 travelling together with a COVID-19 case
in any mode of transport*;
 A healthcare worker or other person
providing care to a COVID-19 case, or
laboratory workers handling specimens
from a COVID-19 case, wearing the
recommended PPE [24].
* Except if sitting in an aircraft as specified in the relevant point in the left column.
Longer duration of contact is assumed to increase the risk of transmission; the 15-minute limit is arbitrarily
selected for practical purposes. Public health authorities may consider some persons who had a shorter duration
of contact with the case as having had high-risk exposure, based on individual risk assessments.
Using only part of the recommended set of PPE increases the exposure of healthcare workers thus increasing the
risk.
Key steps after a case is identified
Contact identification and listing
Immediately after a confirmed or probable case has been identified, the next steps regarding contact tracing for
the public health authorities include:
• Interviewing the case to collect information on clinical history and possible contacts that occurred from 48
hours before symptom onset until the case was isolated. This should be undertaken through a phone call
where possible. Cases may be hospitalised and possibly be in a poor condition; in such instances, hospital
staff or the treating physician may be able to assist in collecting information either directly from the case
or close family members.
• Tracing the contacts and classifying them into high-risk exposure (‘close contact’) or low-risk exposure, as
described in Table 1 above. Information should also be collected on whether the contact belongs to one
of the risk groups for severe COVID-19, or works with vulnerable populations (e.g. providing care to the
elderly or to immunocompromised people).
• Arranging for testing of symptomatic contacts for SARS-CoV-2 (see ECDC webpage on laboratory support
for COVID-19 and WHO recommendations for testing strategy).
• Tracing, and communicating with, the identified contacts and providing information about suitable
infection control measures, symptom monitoring and other precautionary measures such as the need for
quarantine.
Contact follow-up
Depending on the exposure risk level, individuals and public health authorities should consider several actions
(Table 2).
High-risk exposure contacts should be actively monitored by public health authorities, whereas low-risk exposure
contacts could self-monitor for symptoms while observing physical distancing measures and avoiding travel.
Quarantine should be considered for high-risk exposure contacts [14]. If symptoms of illness occur, contacts
should immediately self-isolate and seek medical advice, preferably by phone first, always following
recommendations of the national/local authorities.
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
4
Table 2. Key actions for management of contacts
Actions
High-risk exposure
(close contact)
Low-risk exposure
Individual For a period of 14 days after the last exposure to a
COVID-19 case, high-risk contacts should be advised to:
 quarantine at home if possible*. If not possible,
respect physical distancing measures and avoid
travel;
 daily self-monitoring for COVID-19-compatible
symptoms, including fever of any grade, cough,
fatigue or difficulty breathing;
 take and record temperature daily (contacts should
avoid the use of fever-reducing medication a few
hours before they take their temperature);
 remain contactable by public health authorities;
 implement rigorous hand hygiene and respiratory
etiquette;
 self-isolate immediately should symptoms develop
and seek medical advice, preferably by phone first,
following recommendations of the national/local
authorities.
For a period of 14 days after the last exposure, low-
risk contacts should be advised to:
 daily self-monitoring for COVID-19-compatible
symptoms, including fever of any grade, cough,
fatigue or difficulty breathing;
 respect physical distancing measures and avoid
travel;
 implement rigorous hand hygiene and
respiratory etiquette measures;
 self-isolate immediately should symptoms
develop and seek medical advice, preferably by
phone first, following recommendations of the
national/local authorities.
Public health
authorities
For a period of 14 days after the last exposure to a
COVID-19 case:
 Active follow-up of the contacts (e.g. daily phone
calls, e-mails, text messages). Contacts can be
encouraged to also proactively contact public health
authorities as soon as they develop any compatible
symptoms, outside of the scheduled follow-up;
 testing of contacts that develop COVID-19-
compatible symptoms if possible**
 if test is negative, continue individual actions
for a period of 14 days after the last exposure;
 if the test is positive, notify the case and
initiate contact tracing.
For a period of 14 days after the last low-risk
exposure to a COVID-19 case:
 Encourage low-risk contacts to proactively
contact public health authorities if they develop
any compatible symptoms;
 If the contact develops COVID-19-compatible
symptoms, follow steps as for high-risk
contacts.
Based on individual risk assessments, public health
authorities may consider excluding low-risk exposure
contacts from work if they work with vulnerable
populations (e.g. those who provide care to elderly).
* See ECDC technical report on ’Infection prevention and control in the household management of people with suspected or
confirmed coronavirus disease (COVID-19)’ [25].
**See ECDC ‘Guidance for discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community transmission of COVID-19 -
first update’ [26].
Resource considerations
Contact tracing can be resource intensive. Each country will need to adapt their contact tracing intensity to the
local epidemiological situation and according to available resources. These resources may be strengthened by
recruiting non-medical staff, including volunteers, if sufficient data protection safeguards, training, and
supervision can be provided. Other available resources, such as recruiting call centres set up for other purposes,
can also be considered. Measures that may help save resources include switching to self-monitoring for close
contacts instead of daily calls, or introducing an app or other online tool to assist with monitoring [27,28]. To
enable scaling up contact tracing, contacts could also be contacted and informed through text messages instead
of phone calls [28]. WHO has developed the Go.Data tool which enables more efficient and effective contact
tracing; the tool makes it possible to quickly follow up contacts, visualise chains of transmission, and share data.
If resources become too limited to test symptomatic contacts, all symptomatic contacts should be advised to self-
isolate and should be managed as a case [26].
Using contact tracing data to inform response
Data on contact tracing investigations should be collated and analysed at the local and/or national level in order
to learn from investigations and inform the response. Examples include gaining an understanding of transmission
and attack rates, identifying and documenting settings where transmission takes place, and understanding the
effectiveness of different mitigation measures such as physical distancing.
An algorithm for the management of contacts of probable or confirmed COVID-19 cases can be found in the
Annex.
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
5
Contributing ECDC experts (in alphabetical
order)
Cornelia Adlhoch, Andrew J Amato-Gauci, Agoritsa Baka, Orlando Cenciarelli, Bruno Ciancio, Stefania De Angelis,
Tarik Derrough, Erika Duffell, Lina Nerlander, Pasi Penttinen, Daniel Palm, Diamantis Plachouras, Emmanuel
Robesyn, Ettore Severi, Gianfranco Spiteri, Bertrand Sudre, Carl Suetens, Phillip Zucs.
References
1. Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Epidemic update and risk assessment of 2019 novel coronavirus.
Beijing: CCDC; 2020. Available from: http://www.chinacdc.cn/yyrdgz/202001/P020200128523354919292.pdf.
2. Backer JA, Klinkenberg D, Wallinga J. Incubation period of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infections among
travellers from Wuhan, China, 20–28 January 2020. Eurosurveillance. 2020;25(5).
3. Du Z, Xu X, Wu Y, Wang L, Cowling BJ, Meyers LA. Serial interval of COVID-19 among publicly reported confirmed
cases. Emerging infectious diseases. 2020;26(6).
4. Ganyani T, Kremer C, Chen D, Torneri A, Faes C, Wallinga J, et al. Estimating the generation interval for COVID-19
based on symptom onset data. medRxiv. 2020:2020.03.05.20031815.
5. Han Y, Yang H. The transmission and diagnosis of 2019 novel coronavirus infection disease (COVID-19): A Chinese
perspective. Journal of Medical Virology.n/a(n/a).
6. Zou L, Ruan F, Huang M, Liang L, Huang H, Hong Z, et al. SARS-CoV-2 viral load in upper respiratory specimens of
infected patients. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;382(12):1177-9.
7. Cereda D, Tirani M, Rovida F, Demicheli V, Ajelli M, Poletti P, et al. The early phase of the COVID-19 outbreak in
Lombardy, Italy 2020. Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.09320v1.
8. World Health Organization (WHO). Modes of transmission of virus causing COVID-19:implications for IPC precaution
recommendations. Geneva: WHO; 2020 [accessed 27 March 2020]. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-
detail/modes-of-transmission-of-virus-causing-covid-19-implications-for-ipc-precaution-recommendations.
9. van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, Holbrook MG, Gamble A, Williamson BN, et al. Aerosol and surface stability
of SARS-CoV-2 as compared with SARS-CoV-1. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020.
10. Cheng VCC, Wong S-C, Chen JHK, Yip CCY, Chuang VWM, Tsang OTY, et al. Escalating infection control response to
the rapidly evolving epidemiology of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) due to SARS-CoV-2 in Hong Kong.
Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology. 2020:1-24.
11. Santarpia JL, Rivera DN, Herrera V, Morwitzer MJ, Creager H, Santarpia GW, et al. Transmission potential of SARS-CoV-
2 in viral shedding observed at the University of Nebraska Medical Center. medRxiv. 2020:2020.03.23.20039446.
12. World Health Organization (WHO). Report of the WHO–China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Geneva: WHO; 2020. Available from: https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-
on-covid-19-final-report.pdf.
13. Istituto superiore di sanità. Sorveglianza integrata COVID-19 in Italia: Aggiornamento 22 marzo 2020. Rome: Istituto
superiore di sanità; 2020. Available from:
https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/Infografica_22marzo%20ITA.pdf.
14. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Guidelines for the use of non-pharmaceutical measures to
delay and mitigate the impact of 2019-nCoV. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/novel-coronavirus-guidelines-non-pharmaceutical-
measures_0.pdf.
15. Hellewell J, Abbott S, Gimma A, Bosse NI, Jarvis CI, Russell TW, et al. Feasibility of controlling 2019-nCoV outbreaks by
isolation of cases and contacts. medRxiv. 2020.
16. Keeling MJ, Hollingsworth TD, Read JM. The efficacy of contact tracing for the containment of the 2019 novel
coronavirus (COVID-19). medRxiv. 2020.
17. Peak CM, Kahn R, Grad YH, Childs LM, Li R, Lipsitch M, et al. Modeling the comparative impact of individual quarantine
vs. active monitoring of contacts for the mitigation of COVID-19. medRxiv. 2020.
18. Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019
novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. The Lancet. 2020 2020/02/15/;395(10223):507-13.
19. Bi Q, Wu Y, Mei S, Ye C, Zou X, Zhang Z, et al. Epidemiology and transmission of COVID-19 in Shenzhen China:
Analysis of 391 cases and 1 286 of their close contacts. medRxiv. 2020.
20. Choe YJ. Coronavirus disease-19: Summary of 2 370 contact investigations of the first 30 cases in the Republic of
Korea. medRxiv. 2020.
21. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and
monitoring activities in the EU/EEA [internet]. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020 [accessed 11 March 2020]. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/resource-estimation-contact-tracing-quarantine-and-monitoring-
activities-covid-19.
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
6
22. World Health Organization (WHO). Home care for patients with suspected novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection
presenting with mild symptoms and management of contacts [internet]. Geneva: WHO; 2020 [accessed 4 February
2020]. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/home-care-for-patients-with-suspected-novel-
coronavirus-(ncov)-infection-presenting-with-mild-symptoms-and-management-of-contacts.
23. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Risk assessment guidelines for infectious diseases
transmitted on aircraft (RAGIDA) – Middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Stockholm: ECDC;
2020. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/infectious-diseases-transmitted-on-
aircrafts-ragida-risk-assessment-guidelines.pdf.
24. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Infection prevention and control for the care of patients
with 2019-nCoV in healthcare settings 2020 [accessed 20 February 2020]. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/infection-prevention-and-control-care-patients-2019-ncov-
healthcare-settings.
25. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Infection prevention and control in the household
management of people with suspected or confirmed coronavirus disease (COVID-19) [accessed 31 March 2020].
Stockholm: ECDC; 2020. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/infection-prevention-
control-household-management-covid-19.
26. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Guidance for discharge and ending isolation in the
context of widespread community transmission of COVID-19 - first update) [accessed 8 April 2020]. Stockholm: ECDC;
2020. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid-19-guidance-discharge-and-
ending-isolation-first%20update.pdf.
27. TheJournal.ie. 80 defence forces cadets are being trained in Covid-19 contact tracing [internet]. Dublin: TheJournal.ie;
13 March 2020 [accessed 23 March 2020]. Available from: https://www.thejournal.ie/defence-forces-cadets-trained-in-
coronavirus-contact-tracing-5046020-Mar2020/.
28. Personal communication, 23 March 2020: Greg Martin, specialist in public health medicine, Health Service Executive,
Ireland.
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
7
Annex
Algorithm for the management of contacts of probable or
confirmed COVID-19 cases
