 

NDVI

Gosenaueat of lia
Minising ef Frome Aas

 

(Disascer Warngemenn Division)
chWing. 37 Floor, NOCC-LL
Ja: Singh १०७4 ०७ छजीप- 000[
Pots |448.2000
Tw
‘he Chie? Seeretaris
(A States)
Subject Ttems and Norms uf ussistunce from the State Disastor Response Fund

(SRE) in wake of COVID-I9 Virus Outbreak
SinfMadarn
2020-NDMI dared 24 March

2020 a the dhuve nienticne! subjeei snd lp enclose herewith pefiaty madlified list of tems

Tam ivected tv rer this Ministry's lear No,

 

 

4 norms of assistance for contaiuucent of COVID-TY Virus in Anda, elazibleteaen SDRP.

 

(Sexsjoes Kure Finda)
Joint Secretery ui Government al Train
ek 23488096

 

Copy AS[LT). MHA far ueking siuilur provisious Dor uitiztion of UT Disastor Response

 

nds 2g tho Unive: Terres.

CC for information: PS to HIM/MOS{NYAS.
Aumenure to Ministey of Hamme Alfaies letter Nu, 33-4/2020-ND WA dated 4.03,2020
Vadificd List uf items & nueray of assistance from State Disaster Response Fund
(SDF) in the wake of COVIDAD virus outbreak

   

 

SLNe. TEMS RORMS OF ASSISTANCE

 

प्‌... Measures for quarantine, sual expendiaurs and ae
sample collection and af nood by State kxecutive Commitee (SEC), to
sereening: emery the Reece containment of outbreak fa

peried upto 30 dase. The SPC will docide the
छ) Prevision foe temporary nun af yuarantie carp Hei sunaom snl dh
seoommodation, tad,
lathing, medical eee,
Tor pepe allel veriod cum he sxiemied By he SEC hexand the
shholrcred in suarantice jiescribed feat sudyect fo eoradion des eendise
wamps (olter than Lome on this account sliouid wet exceed 257 of SPRF
qummviney ov fir cluster aliocorin f+ te sear
[| Sontairment operations.

 

   

 

पता हे persans in such exempt

      

 

   

 

(b Cost of cousmmables For Medical care mg’ alsa he pravided fom National
| pumple collection Healta Mission (NHMY

[© Smppart foe ahecking
Iscrecning awd exit

 

 

     

  

 

 

है पथरी गए कं छ ए घरापज हपए छाए दो (न
rot Loan NRT), a asamases by the State Exceutive
response to COVIMI9: Committee (SEC) u srengiben the surveillemse and
al Cust keuing up corel measures agamuse COWID (9 virus oulhrauh
acklvional testing
faboratorics within the
Government ond the cost off
consumables ‘Total expsudamuc on opment shiulé na exceed
fos Cost of persona | 79% of the anu] allocaricn of the SDRE
prewsstion cqipment Zor
healcsesre, municipal, police
un ire anchovies,
fc} Cost ar Taermst
Scam, ventilators, aie
purdes, and consumstes
for Goygruurent hospitals |
Rovers

L. SPC shall ansuss qverall oversight mnechanise 6 that ne duplicarion rakes place
reference tn other Cvverament sebimes.

2. Aay amouut spent hy the State for COVID-I9, aver md aboes the ealing, would be bere
for of the resources of the Stats Goverment aad wt tiny SRT.

 

 

 

कील
