Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19 health, care and volunteer workers
parking pass and concessions
Published 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19 health, care and volunteer workers parking pass and concessions
Ministry of Housing,
Communities &
Local Government
This pass provides evidence of entitlement to free parking for those on duty as an NHS staff member, health or social care
worker, or NHS Volunteer Responder. This is to enable them to access parking concessions in local authority-owned off-
street car parks and on-street bays during the COVID-19 emergency response period.
The pass does not replace any existing permit that has been issued by a local authority for COVID-19 parking
concessions, which you should continue to use. You can also continue to use any other evidence of entitlement to these
Contents
How to use the pass
COVID-19 parking concessions – general guidance
What to do in the event of enforcement action
parking concessions that has previously been accepted by your local authority.
Everyone who is entitled to COVID-19 parking concessions, as well as local authority parking enforcement, should read
the following general guidance.
How to use the pass
Passes will be made available through NHS Trusts, local authorities and the Royal Volunteering Society.
You should clearly write your registration number and name of your employer where indicated. For NHS Volunteer
Responders please put Royal Voluntary Service as your employer.
Display your pass on the dashboard where it can be clearly seen through a windscreen with the printed side facing up.
If the detail on the pass becomes illegible you should print and complete a new one.
When the pass is clearly displayed and used in accordance with these guidance notes, pass users will not usually receive
PCNs and should not be towed away, unless they are parked causing a serious obstruction.
COVID-19 parking concessions – general guidance
Parking concessions for COVID-19 can only be used when on official duty as an NHS staff member, health and social
care worker or NHS Volunteer Responder. Local authorities, NHS Trusts and the Royal Voluntary Service will be
distributing the pass to those they deem to be eligible within this definition.
Please check carefully whether a car park is council or privately owned or operated before parking. This COVID-19
parking concession is available in council owned and operated off-street car parks, on the public highway and on
council maintained housing estates only.
Similar concessions may be available in some private car parks during the COVID-19 emergency response, but you
should check with operators locally as to where these apply and whether any additional information is required. For
example, you may need to register your vehicle registration with the operator to gain a concession before parking. Car
parks which use Automatic Number Plate Recognition technology (ANPR) may issue a Penalty Charge Notice even if a
vehicle is temporarily parked, whilst terms and conditions are being read.
Pass users, whilst on official duty, can park in on-street dedicated parking bays such as; pay to park bays and
residents’ bays without having to pay.
If there are no alternative parking spaces available, users can park on single yellow lines, with the exception of:
those where additional loading restrictions apply (look for kerb markings and loading restriction times shown on
upright signs), or
those that are within 10 metres of a junction.
Concession users are advised to park considerately and safely. They must always ensure that they do not cause an
obstruction or endanger other road users and must not stay in a parking place for any longer than is necessary.
If the pass or other previously agreed permit/evidence is not displayed correctly, a Civil Enforcement Officer may not be
able to establish that you are on duty and may issue a Penalty Charge Notice (PCN).
This scheme will last for as long as government deems necessary, as part of its COVID-19 response. The end of the
scheme will be publicly communicated. COVID-19 parking concessions must not be used beyond the date upon which
you are advised that they have ceased.
Concessions do not apply on-street in the following places:
parking at your normal place of residence or other locations whilst not at work or volunteering
on double yellow lines
on single yellow lines within 10 metres of a junction
where loading and unloading restrictions (kerb markings) are in operation
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
zig zag lines at pedestrian crossings
keep clear markings outside a school, a hospital or fire, police or ambulance station
dropped kerbs
bus stops
suspended bays
disabled bays
police bays
ambulance bays
car club bays
electric vehicles bays
red routes
Any parking outside of the concessions guidance may result in the receipt of aPCN.
What to do in the event of enforcement action
If you do receive a PCN please contact the issuing local authority and explain that you were on official duties.
If a vehicle showing the pass or other previously accepted evidence or permit needs to be relocated due to it causing an
obstruction, every effort will be made to find the user before any action is taken. Wherever possible the vehicle will be
relocated to the nearest safe on-street location.
If you receive a parking ticket (often called a Parking Charge Notice) from a private parking company, then you will have
to contact the company directly. These concessions are not valid for all privately owned or managed car parks. You
must check first before parking or entering a car park.
The pass is valid in all local authority areas across England. However, local policy within certain areas may apply
should a PCN be issued. Check your local authorities’ website for further details.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
