HIGHLIGHTS
 Today, 8 February, the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand
announced seven more laboratory-confirmed 2019-nCoV cases,
bringing the total of confirmed cases in Thailand so far to 32.
 Of the new cases reported, three are Thai nationals and four are visitors
from China to Thailand.
 This makes it a total of 23 Chinese visitors and 9 Thai nationals confirmed
with novel coronavirus infection to date in Thailand.
 One of the Thai cases is a man who was among the 138 Thai nationals
brought back to Thailand from Wuhan, Hubei Province, China on 4
February and who were immediately placed in quarantine at Thai Navy
guesthouses. He tested negative for novel coronavirus for two days running, but displayed mild flu-like
symptoms on 7 February, yesterday, whereupon tests confirmed 2019-nCoV infection. The Ministry reports
that the man is doing well today.
 Of the other two Thai cases announced today, one had close contact with international visitors to Thailand.
The other case is a close contact of this person.
 Out of the four Chinese visitors reported today to have novel coronavirus, three are members of the same
family who were close contacts of an earlier confirmed case, thereby constituting a family cluster of infection.
 The Ministry of Public Health says that 375 persons are currently under investigation, while 279 have been
treated for symptoms and discharged.
 Earlier confirmed cases of Thai nationals include two taxi drivers and a bus driver who likely came into
contact with infected passengers from China. The Thai authorities today emphasised that taxi drivers, tourist
bus drivers, retail sector employees and other nationals who through their work come into close contact with
international visitors constitute a “high risk” category for contracting novel coronavirus. The government has
been conducting a hygiene and safety campaign aimed at citizens who come into close contact with
international visitors or who otherwise operate in crowded environments.
 There were also two Thai nationals who traveled to Japan and displayed symptoms after returning to
Thailand, but health authorities say it’s as yet unclear where they acquired their infection.
 A Thai woman who travelled to Wuhan, China, is also counted among the confirmed cases; she has since
fully recovered.
 A confirmed case in the Republic of Korea had travelled to Thailand prior to onset of illness and diagnosis.
The timeline suggests it is possible infection could have been acquired in either Thailand or in the Republic
of Korea after the person returned home.
 Screening at airports in Thailand has identified fewer and fewer possible cases in recent days. However,
screening has been further intensified at prominent ports in Thailand amid reports that dozens more persons
on a cruise ship off the coast of Yokohama, Japan had tested positive for novel coronavirus.
MEDIA
 Media coverage of the outbreak continues to be high in Thailand, including news of the outbreak from China
and other countries.
 WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak, and has revamped its website to
better present relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies. Media queries can
be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int or kanpirom@who.int
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
WHO Thailand’s strategic objectives to support Thailand’s response are to:
 Limit human-to-human transmission including reducing secondary infections among close contacts and
health care workers, preventing transmission amplification events, and preventing further spread within as
well as to and from Thailand i
;
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 8 February 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
IN NUMBERS
total and new cases in
last 24 hours
32 confirmed
375 persons currently under
investigation
Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 8 February 2020
 Identify, isolate and care for patients early, including providing optimized care for infected patients;
 Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission and infection, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines;
 Communicate critical risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation;
 Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships.
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
 Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.
 Thailand also recently updated its dedicated national pandemic influenza preparedness plan (currently
pending approval by the Prime Minister’s Cabinet).
 With WHO support, the National Institute of Health of Thailand is supporting specimen testing for other
countries as requested; this support is currently being provided to Myanmar, and support for Indonesia and
the Maldives is also being arranged.
 A special advisory group consisting of former high-level health officials has been formed to support the
Health Ministry in its response to the outbreak.
 The Health Ministry is conducting modelling exercises with the National Research Council of Thailand to
forecast possible scenarios and outcomes as the outbreak evolves in Thailand.
 Visitors to Thailand who have recently been in Wuhan, China, and other affected areas are being provided
information upon arrival by the Ministry of Public Health, including how to report any possible illness to the
Department of Disease Control:
What WHO is doing in Thailand
 WHO Thailand has been in regular and direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry
of Public Health;
 WHO shares information with the Government including key developments elsewhere, as well as guidelines
and updates;
 WHO facilitates the external sharing of the virus between researchers to contribute to regional and global
efforts to develop a vaccine and strengthen efforts to combat the outbreak;
 WHO facilitates support from the WHO collaborating centre in Hong Kong for infectious disease modelling
as required;
 WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand;
 WHO is collaborating with UNICEF on supporting the Ministry of Public Health and Ministry of Education in
relation to special measures in schools and other educational institutions to safeguard against the spread
of 2019-nCoV.
What WHO is doing globally
 WHO has developed a protocol for the investigation of early cases (the “First Few X (FFX) Cases and
contact investigation protocol for 2019-novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infection”). The protocol is designed
to gain an early understanding of the key clinical, epidemiological and virological characteristics of the first
cases of 2019-nCoV infection detected in any individual country, to inform the development and updating of
public health guidance to manage cases and reduce potential spread and impact of infection.
 WHO has developed interim global guidance for laboratory diagnosis, advice on the use of masks during
home care and in health care settings in the context of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak, clinical
management, infection prevention and control in health care settings, home care for patients with suspected
novel coronavirus, risk communication and community engagement and Global Surveillance for human
infection with novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV).
 WHO has prepared a disease commodity package that includes an essential list of biomedical equipment,
medicines and supplies necessary to care for patients with 2019-nCoV.
 WHO has provided recommendations to reduce risk of transmission from animals to humans.
 WHO has published updated advice for international traffic in relation to the outbreak of the novel
coronavirus 2019-nCoV.
 WHO has activated an R&D blueprint to accelerate diagnostics, vaccines, and therapeutics.
 WHO has developed an online course to provide general introduction to emerging respiratory viruses,
including novel coronaviruses.
 WHO is providing guidance on early investigations, which are critical to carry out early in an outbreak of a
new virus. The data collected from the protocols can be used to refine recommendations for surveillance
and case definitions, to characterize the key epidemiological transmission features of 2019-nCoV, help
understand spread, severity, spectrum of disease, impact on the community and to inform operational
models for implementation of countermeasures such as case isolation, contact tracing and isolation. Several
protocols are available here: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-
guidance/early-investigations
 WHO is working with its networks of researchers and other experts to coordinate global work on surveillance,
epidemiology, modelling, diagnostics, clinical care and treatment, and other ways to identify, manage the
disease and limit onward transmission. WHO has issued interim guidance for countries, which is updated
regularly.
 WHO is working with global expert networks and partnerships for laboratory, infection prevention and
control, clinical management and mathematical modelling.
USEFUL LINKS
 For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, access the WHO Thailand website:
www.who.int/thailand
 For the latest worldwide figures and technical advice about the outbreak, including how to protect yourself,
access WHO Headquarters’ website: www.who.int including daily global situation reports:
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports/
 For the latest on the Thai government response, access the Department of Disease Control, Thai
Ministry of Public Health 2019-nCoV landing page: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/intro.php
English: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/eng/index.php
Thai: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/index.php
Chinese: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/chn/index.php
The Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422 (dialed from within Thailand).
 For a comprehensive 2019-nCoV global case-tracker, via data visualisation including maps and charts,
access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE):
https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ec
f6 (English)
https://mophgis.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/210413ebb5ff49bb8914808af6473322
(Thai)
For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the 2019-nCoV outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
i
This can be achieved through a combination of public health measures, such as rapid identification, diagnosis and management of
the cases, identification and follow up of the contacts, infection prevention and control in healthcare settings, implementation of health
measures for travellers, awareness-raising in the population and risk communication
