KNOW, PREPARE, PROTECT
Information on COVID-19 for
pregnant women
KNOW
What is the novel coronavirus?
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that cause
illness ranging from the common cold to more severe
diseases. The novel coronavirus is a new strain, not
previously identified in humans. COVID-19 is the
infectious disease caused by the latest discovered
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2).
How does the virus spread?
People can catch COVID-19 from others who have the
virus through inhaling small droplets from people with
COVID-19 who cough or sneeze or through touching
contaminated surfaces.
What are the symptoms?
Many people who become infected experience mild
illness and recover, but it can be more severe for
others.
The symptoms include a combination of:
Fever
Cough
Difficulty breathing
Muscle pain
Tiredness
Insert national link here
www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/novel-coronavirus-china
If you become ill with symptoms of cough, fever and
difficulty breathing:
Stay home and call your local health care services for
advice.
Mention that you are pregnant.
What do you do if you fall ill?
Are pregnant women more at risk than
others? Can the virus be transmitted to
the baby?
Pregnant women are not more at risk of catching
COVID-19 or suffering from the more severe disease
than other adults of similar age.
There is no evidence that the virus can be transmitted
to the unborn child during pregnancy, or during
childbirth.
Babies and young children are known to only
experience mild forms of COVID-19.
If you are found ill with COVID-19:
Call your midwife or antenatal care provider and
inform them about your illness.
Request instructions on how to proceed with antenatal
care appointments and delivery plans during the
course of your illness.
For further information:
[national website]
www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/novel-coronavirus-china
NATIONAL INFORMATION ON
COVID-19
[National information]
[National number +xx xxx xxx xxx]
PREPARE
What to do if are a pregnant women?
How can you prepare yourself
Educate yourself on COVID-19 from trusted sources.
Keep physically active to ensure good physical
condition.
Discuss your concerns about COVID-19 with your
antenatal care provider.
Call your antenatal care provider to ask for specific
indications on how to proceed with antenatal
appointments and your delivery plan, including in case
you become ill with COVID-19.
Have over-the-counter medicines and medical
supplies (e.g. tissues, thermometer) to treat fever.
If taking any prescription medicines, refill them, or
consider using a mail order for your medications.
Have enough groceries and household items,
approximately 2-4 weeks. Prepare gradually and avoid
panic buying.
Activate your social network. Contact family, friends,
neighbours or community health care workers in
advance and make joint plans on what to do when
COVID-19 is spreading in your community or if you
become ill.
Follow instructions from national authorities on how to
prepare for emergencies.
Continue to practice general hygiene.
PROTECT
How can you protect yourself and others
Clean your hands often. Wash your hands
with soap and water or, if not available,
use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer:
Avoid touching your face, nose and eyes.
Avoid contact with sick people, in
particular those with a cough.
Before eating, after using the toilet;
After blowing your nose, coughing or sneezing;
After having been in public places;
After having touched surfaces in public places;
After having touched other people.
Avoid meetings, events and other social
gatherings in areas with ongoing community
transmission.
If you develop cough, once COVID-19 is
spreading in your community, use medical
facemasks. This will protect those around
you from getting infected.
Practice social distancing if COVID-19 is
spreading in your community:
Avoid crowds, especially in confined and poorly
ventilated spaces.
Do your grocery shopping at off-peak hours.
Avoid using public transport during rush hours.
Exercise outdoors instead of indoor settings.
