F. No. 11013/9/2014-Estt.A. Ill
Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
(Department of Personnel and Training)
North Block, New Delhi
Dated: 16/03/2020
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Preventive measures to be taken to contain the spread of Novel
Coronavirus (COVID-1 9) — regarding.
In order to contain the spread of Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19), some
precautionary measures are required to be taken by all the employees and the
Ministries/Departments. In this regard, it has been decided to issue the
following advisory for the well-being of Government employees and in public
interest.
2. All the Ministries/Departments are advised to take all necessary
measures such as :-
(i) Install thermal scanners at the entry of Government buildings,
as feasible. Mandatory placing of hand sanitizers at the entry of
Government buildings. Those found having flu-like symptoms
may be advised to take proper treatment/quarantine etc.
(ii) Discourage, to the maximum extent, entry of visitors in the office
complex. Routine issue of visitors/temporary passes should be
suspended with immediate effect. Only those visitors whom
have proper permission of the officer who they want to meet,
should be allowed after being properly screened.
(iii) Meetings, as far as feasible, should be done through video
conferencing. To minimize or reschedule meetings involving
large number of people unless necessary.
(iy) Avoid non-essential official travel.
(v) Undertake essential correspondence on official email and avoid
sending files and documents to other offices, to the extent
possible.
(vi) Facilitate delivery and receipt of dak at the entry point itself of
the office building, as far as practicable.
(vii) Close all gyms/recreation centres/creches located in
Government buildings.
(viii) Ensure proper cleaning and frequent sanitization of the work-
place, particularly of the frequently touched surfaces.
Page 1 of 3
(ix) Ensure regular supply of hand sanitisers, soap and running
water in the washrooms.
(x) All officials may be advised to take care of their own health and
look out for respiratory symptoms/fever and, if feeling unwell,
should leave the workplace immediately after informing their
reporting officers. They should observe home-quarantine as
per the guidelines issued by MoH&FW, Government of India
available at the following URL:
mohfwqov.in/DraftGuideIinesforhomequarantine.pdf.
(xi) The leave sanctioning authorities are advised to sanction leave
whenever any request is made for self-quarantine as a
precautionary measure.
(xii) Advise all employees who are at higher risk i.e. older
employees, pregnant employees and employees who have
underlying medical conditions, to take extra precautions. The
Ministries/Departments may take care not to expose such
employees to any front-line work requiring direct contact with
the public.
3. An indicative list of Do's and Don'ts is also annexed for wide
dissemination.
End: As above
(Umesh Kumar Bhatia)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India
1. All the Ministries/Departments, Government of India
2. PMO/Cabinet Secretariat
3. PS to Hon'ble MOS(PP)
4. P50 to Secretary(Personnel)
H For Information
5. Sr. Tech. Dir., NIC, DoP&T
Page 2 of 3
To,
ANNEXURE
Do's
• To maintain personal hygiene and physical distancing.
• To practice frequent hand washing. Wash hands with soap and water or
use alcohol-based hand rub. Wash hands even if they are visibly clean.
• To cover your nose and mouth with handkerchief/tissue while sneezing
and coughing.
• To throw used tissues into closed bins immediately after use.
• To maintain a safe distance from persons during interaction, especially
with those having flu-like symptoms.
• To sneeze in the inner side of your elbow and not to cough into the
palms of your hands.
• To take their temperature regularly and check for respiratory symptoms.
To see a doctor if you feel unwell (fever, difficulty in breathing and
coughing). While visiting doctor, wear a mask/cloth to cover your mouth
and nose.
• For any fever/flu-like signs/symptoms, please call State helpline number.
or the 24x7 helpline number of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
at 011-23978046.
Don'ts
• Shake hands.
• Have a close contact with anyone, if you're experiencing cough and
fever.
• Touch your eyes, nose and mouth.
• Sneeze or cough into palms of your hands.
• Spit in Public.
• Travel unnecessarily, particularly to any affected region.
• Participate in large gatherings, including sitting in groups at canteens.
• Visit gyms, clubs and crowded places etc.
• Spread rumours or panic.
Page 3 of 3
