1 | P a g e
Global updates
As of 06 February 2020, 7.31 am (IST)
2 | P a g e
India Situation
The Prime Minister's Office, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) and Cabinet
Secretary are closely monitoring the emerging situation on novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in India
on a daily basis.
Between 30 January and 3 February 2020, MoHFW confirmed three cases of 2019-nCoV in Kerala.
These patients are in stable condition and are being closely monitored in hospital isolation.
MoHFW has designated, ICMR National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune as the nodal centre for
coordinating diagnostics for 2019-nCoV. Additionally, 11 regional laboratories have been equipped
and trained, and they now have started testing samples. As of 05 February 2020, 901 samples have
been tested of which only 3 were positive.
Government of India (GoI) has issued travel advisories requesting the public to refrain from travel to
China and that anyone with a travel history since 15th January 2020 from China will be quarantined
on return.
Further, e-Visa facility for Chinese passport holders has been suspended and existing visas (already
issued) are no longer valid for any foreign national travelling from China to India.
As on 06 February 2020, a total of 1108 flights have been screened covering a total of 121 000
passengers. Screening of passengers is ongoing in 21 airports, international seaports and border
crossings particularly with Nepal. Presently over 6000 passengers from 29 States/UTs are under
home quarantine.
States have extended support to provide additional manpower to undertake screening and provide
other logistic support to airport public health officers. States that do not have airports or seaports,
such as Haryana and Chhattisgarh, have reported that special awareness drives have been initiated
at toll plaza, bus stations and railway stations.
Designated aero bridges are being used at seven international airports (Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai,
Cochin, Bengaluru, Hyderabad & Chennai) at the dedicated gates to screen passengers from China,
Singapore, Thailand and Hong Kong to minimize the risk of transmission. Ministry of Tourism is
coordinating with the Hotels Association in India to encourage wider self-reporting by travelers visiting
religious and other tourist places in identified states.
A 24x7 Control Room has been made operational (011-23978046) and IEC materials are being widely
disseminated through various communications channels such as print, electronic and social media.
3 | P a g e
Situation in Kerala
On 3 February 2020, Kerala reported the third confirmed case of 2019-nCoV in Kasaragod (the first
and second case was in Thrissur and Alapuzha, respectively). 91 contacts of these three laboratory
confirmed cases are in home quarantine and being regularly followed-up. The State Disaster
Management Committee had convened for a meeting and declared this outbreak as a state calamity.
The situation is being closely monitored by the Kerala Health Minister and Principal Health Secretary
with daily press briefing being led by the Health Minister. Further, to ensure concerted and coordinated
efforts to tackle the emerging situation, Kerala Chief Secretary had also convened for an intersectoral
meeting of Secretaries from all government departments.
As of 5 February, 2 528 passengers returning from China have been identified out of which 2 435
have been placed under home quarantine and 93 have been admitted to different health facilities,
where they are under medical observation.
Till date, 223 samples of suspected cases have been sent to ICMR NIV, of which 193 samples have
been tested negative, 3 as positive and results for 27 are pending. Further, since 04 February 2020,
ICMR NIV Alappuzha has become functional and has received 88 samples for testing so far.
The state and district control rooms in Kerala have been activated and daily meetings are being held.
Additionally, the medical officers and junior nursing staff have been trained in surveillance and contact
tracing. For all 14 districts a Medical Board has been constituted with specialty experts to provide
effective care for the patients. There is ongoing work to strengthen professional bodies like Indian
Medical Association, Indian Academy of Pediatrics and Private Hospitals Association on surveillance,
infection prevention and control, and case management.
Ambulances have been identified in each district and are prepared to be available on call. Risk
Communications has been strengthened to address rumor, fake news and miscommunications.
WHO Response
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) support at national level
WCO is closely working with key technical institutions of MoHFW including National Centre for
Diseases Control (NCDC), the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting on disease surveillance, laboratory testing capacity and risk
communications, respectively.
As a member of the Joint Monitoring Group on Emerging Diseases which brings together Line
Ministries and agencies (Ministry of Defense, Home affairs, Civil Aviation, Agriculture), WCO has
been providing continuous updates and technical guidance on risk assessment and reviewing
preparedness and response.
WCO is providing support to ICMR on laboratory and research protocols and National AIDS Control
Organization for repurposing of Antiviral drugs for 2019-nCoV. In addition, WCO is ensuring that
information on suspected cases are shared early and those confirmed are reported to global
community as per the International Health Regulations (IHR).
4 | P a g e
WHO coordination with UN
partners
UN country team, and health partners are
being regularly updated on 2019-nCoV.
On 28 January 2020, WHO
Representative to India (WR) updated
the UNCT team on 2019-nCoV and
convened a Health Partners meeting on
04 February 2020.
WCO support in Kerala
WCO is closely working with the Principal Secretary, Directorate of Health Services and the Integrated
Disease Surveillance Programme and extending full support to the state and districts through the
extended network of WHO consultants working on Tuberculosis (TB), India Hypertension Control
Initiative (IHCI) and National Public Health Surveillance Project (NPSP). A total of eight WHO
consultants have been deployed in 14 districts of Kerala for rapid response. WCO is supporting in
strengthening surveillance and response measures. WCO has also been engaged in control room,
rapid response teams (RRT) and deliberations at both state and district levels to support in decision-
making, developing risk communication materials, private sector sensitization and follow-ups and
case detection.
WCO support in other States
The WCO field teams have been engaged in Uttar Pradesh, where the block monitors were used for
passenger tracking and in other 26 states for response activities; supporting state and district control
rooms; and closely working with the Principal Secretary and MD-NHM. WCO is also engaged in
district task force meetings for enhanced surveillance and contact tracing.
WCO has been closely working across the states for daily screening of passengers, tracking suspects,
contact tracing, training RRTs, State and District, Surveillance Officers and Medical Officers of health
facilities, engaging private sector for contact tracing; risk communications; sharing technical
documents; and providing technical advice on personal protection equipment (PPE) and logistics.
For more information contact:
Dr Tran Minh Nhu Nguyen Dr Ritu Chauhan
Team Lead National Programme Officer
WHO India WHO India
Email: tranminhn@who.int Email: chauhanr@who.int
