HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 14th
of March 2020, seven new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand
(MoPH), bringing the total number of cases in Thailand to 82.
• The first case (#76) is the mother of a previously reported case (#57) who
was linked to a previously reported cluster in connection with a party
• Four cases (#77- #80) are also linked to each other. The first case to be
identified (#77) was a 57-year-old Thai national with a history of travel to
Japan, who developed symptoms leading to a diagnosis of COVID-19.
The other 3 cases are 1.] (#78) her daughter, aged 30, 2.] (#79) the husband of #78 and then 3.] (#80) a
child of cases #78 and #79.
• The sixth case is a 20-year-old Thai national with a history of travel to Japan who developed symptoms and
was admitted to hospital on 11th
March, leading to a diagnosis of COVID-19
• The seventh case is a 41-year-old Thai national with a history of contact with friends who had traveled to
another country. They developed symptoms and were admitted to hospital on 13th
March, leading to
laboratory confirmation of COVID-19
• Of the 82 COVID-19 cases reported in Thailand, 35 have recovered, 46 are in hospital and one has died.
• 43 are imported cases, 38 are locally-transmitted cases. The source for the remaining case is unclear.
• There is now a cumulative total of 5713 Patients Under Investigation (PUIs) identified since the COVID-19
event started in Thailand, including 1758 people who are currently being actively investigated or treated.
This second group includes people being treated for other conditions who are no longer suspected of having
COVID-19 infection.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 14 March 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
IN NUMBERS
total and new cases in
last 24 hours
82 confirmed (7 new)
1 death
1758 persons under
Investigation / treatment
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 14 March 2020
EXPLAINER
Some definitions are provided below of words that are commonly being used to describe the restriction of
movements of people who either, 1.] are known to be infected with COVID-19, 2.] have symptoms consistent
with COVID-19, but have not received laboratory confirmation or 3.] are thought to be at risk of infection with
COVID-19, but who do not have symptoms
Isolation: means the separation of people with symptoms from other people in such a manner as to prevent
the spread of infection. Patients with laboratory confirmation of COVID-19 and people who have symptoms
consistent with COVID-19, but who have not received laboratory confirmation (PUIs) are currently being isolated
in healthcare facilities with the rigorous application of Infection prevention and control measures. For a person
with confirmed COVID-19 infection, this isolation continues until any symptoms of COVID-19 have resolved
AND laboratory testing shows no evidence of active infection. For a PUI, isolation can stop after COVID-19 is
excluded, unless another infection is suspected or diagnosed – which also requires isolation
Quarantine: means the restriction of activities and/or separation from others of people who do not have
symptoms, but who are suspected (or considered to be at risk) of infection in such a manner as to prevent the
possible spread of infection. Quarantine for suspected or at risk for COVID-19 is applied until 14 days (the
maximum incubation period) after the last possible exposure risk. If someone in quarantine develops symptoms,
they need to be isolated.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
The basic principles to reduce the general risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections, including by the
virus causing COVID-19, include the following:
• Avoiding close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections.
• Frequent hand-washing, especially after direct contact with ill people or their environment.
• Avoiding unprotected contact with farm or wild animals.
• People with symptoms of acute respiratory infection should practice cough etiquette (maintain distance, cover
coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clothing, and wash hands).
• Within healthcare facilities, enhance standard infection prevention and control practices in hospitals, especially
in emergency departments.
Advice from WHO on cleaning practices and the survivability of the SARS-CoV-2 virus on surfaces & in different
settings, available here.
WHO does not recommend any specific health measures for travelers. In case of symptoms suggestive of
respiratory illness either during or after travel, travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share
their travel history with their healthcare provider.
MEDIA
• WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak and through its website provides
relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies. Media queries can be directed to
sethawebmaster@who.int and risleyp@who.int
• WHO Thailand’s Twitter and Facebook accounts post useful information on hygiene and protection, such
as when and how to use masks, as well as relevant WHO technical guidelines and other content related to
the novel coronavirus situation in Thailand and globally.
WHO THAILAND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
WHO Thailand’s strategic objectives to support Thailand’s response are to:
• Limit human-to-human transmission including reducing secondary infections among close contacts and
health care workers, preventing transmission amplification events, and preventing further spread within
as well as to and from Thailandi
;
• Identify, isolate and care for patients early, including providing optimized care for infected patients;
• Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission and infection, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines;
• Communicate critical risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation; and
• Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships.
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
• Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.
• Thailand is also updating its dedicated national pandemic influenza preparedness plan (pending approval
by the Prime Minister’s Cabinet).
• With WHO support, the National Institute of Health of Thailand is supporting specimen testing for other
countries as requested.
• The Health Ministry is conducting modelling exercises with the National Research Council of Thailand to
forecast possible scenarios and outcomes as the outbreak evolves in Thailand.
• Visitors to Thailand traveling from affected areas are being screened and provided information upon arrival
by the Ministry of Public Health, including how to report any possible illness to the Department of Disease
Control using the 1422 hotline.
• The Ministry has also introduced a self-reporting online tool, available in Thai, English and Chinese, which
can be accessed here.
What WHO is doing in Thailand
• WHO Thailand remains in regular and direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry
of Public Health, sharing information with the Government including key developments elsewhere, as well
as guidelines and updates;
• WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand;
USEFUL LINKS
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, access the WHO Thailand website:
www.who.int/thailand
• For the latest worldwide figures and technical advice about the outbreak, including how to protect yourself,
access WHO Headquarters’ website: www.who.int including daily global situation reports and WHO’s
technical support worldwide to the COVID-19 response.
• The International Health Regulations (IHR) can be viewed here.
• For the latest on the Thai government response, access the Department of Disease Control, Thai
Ministry of Public Health COVID-19 landing page. *
• The Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422 (dialed from within Thailand).
• The Thai Communicable Diseases Act (revised in 2015) is available here.
• For a comprehensive COVID-19 global case-tracker, access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre for
Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE): in English and Thai.
• Global research on novel coronavirus COVID-19
• The Global Health Network - Coronavirus Outbreak Knowledge Hub - a pop-up area on The Global Health
Network serves as a knowledge hub and access to guidance on COVID-19.
(Note: WHO does not take responsibility for content on external websites.)
For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the COVID-19 outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
i
This can be achieved through a combination of public health measures, such as rapid identification, diagnosis and management of
the cases, identification and follow up of the contacts, infection prevention and control in healthcare settings, implementation of health
measures for travelers, awareness-raising in the population and risk communication
