1
Basic Policies for Novel Coronavirus Disease Control
(Tentative translation)
February 25, 2020
Decisions by the Headquarters for Novel Coronavirus Disease Control
1. Current situation and purpose of the Basic Policies
A number of quarantine measures have been taken against the
novel coronavirus disease, but patients with no apparent routes of
transmission have been reported sporadically in several regions of
Japan, and in some regions, small clusters of patients have been
confirmed. Nevertheless, at this time, there are no regions where a
large-scale spread of the infection has been identified.
In order to end this epidemic as soon as possible, it is extremely
important to prevent one cluster from developing another cluster,
and the comprehensive measures must be taken. It is also
significantly important to curtail the rate of increase in patients as
much as possible through these preventative measures, in order to
control the epidemic in Japan.
Moreover, this is also the time to establish and improve
arrangements including the health system to deliver necessary
medical care especially for the severe patients, to prepare for the
possible increase of patients in Japan.
In order to accurately understand the current situations related to
the novel coronavirus disease, and to collectively implement the
infection control measures with the national and regional
governments, medical professionals, private sectors, and all citizens,
this document presents the comprehensive Basic Policies to control
the infection, laying out the measures currently being taken and the
perspectives of possible future measures to be taken to respond to
future development.
This is an extremely critical time for minimizing future negative
impact on health in Japan. Given the characteristics of the novel
2
coronavirus disease described in item 2 below, we ask all the people
in Japan to refrain from seeking medical care without appropriate
consultation due to the anxiety of potential infection, and avoid the
environments with high risk of infection. Moreover, we request the
people to wash their hands and to cover their mouth when coughing,
refrain from going out when they have symptoms, and wear masks
when they need to go out.
2. Current knowledge of the novel coronavirus disease
・ The routes of transmission are generally through droplets and
contacts. It is not thought to be caused by airborne infections.
In addition, under certain circumstances, such as when
talking to many people at a short distance in confined spaces,
there is the risk of spreading the infection even without
coughing or sneezing.
・ Infectivity varies from case to case. There have been suspected
cases which spread the infection to many people. Meanwhile,
there are many cases where the virus did not transmit to those
surrounding the infected person.
・ Often, fevers or respiratory symptoms may persist for around
one week, and many patients complain of strong fatigue. It has
been reported that the period of hospitalization tends to be
longer than that of seasonal influenza.
・ Those infected often present only mild symptoms, which will
heal in many cases. The severity of the novel coronavirus
disease is not as great as infectious diseases with extremely
high mortality rates, but it does have the higher risk than
seasonal influenza. The risks of developing severe symptoms
are particularly high among the elderly and patients with
underlying diseases.
・ Unlike influenza, no effective antiviral drug has been
developed, therefore the treatment is primarily conservative
treatment. Additionally, there are currently no rapid test kits.
3
・ Meanwhile, regarding treatment methods, it is possible that
medications for other viruses may be effective.
3. Objectives of countermeasures at this moment
・ The primary aim is to end the epidemic in its early stages
through measures to prevent the spread of infection while
suppressing the rate of increase in patients as much as possible,
and minimizing the scale of the epidemic.
・ Make every possible effort to minimize the incidence of severe
cases.
・ Minimize the impact on society and economy.
4. Key points of the Basic Policies for Novel Coronavirus
Disease Control
(1) Information sharing with the people, private sectors, and
regions
a) Provide accurate and easy-to-understand information and call
on the people to encourage calm responses.
・Provide accurate information that includes clinical
information and the situations of the outbreak
・Take general infection prevention measures such as hand
washing and covering their mouth when coughing
・Urge those with fever or other flu-like symptoms to take
off from work or school and refrain from going out
・Raise awareness that seeking medical care without
appropriate consultation due to the anxiety about potential
infection may end up increasing the risk of infection, etc.
b) Urge companies to encourage employees and other personnel
to take leave if they have fever or other flu-like symptoms, and
promote teleworking and staggering commuting hours, in order
to reduce the opportunities for contact with patients and infected
persons.
4
c) Request, based on the opinions of the experts meeting,
communities and companies to re-examine the necessity of
hosting public events from the viewpoint of infection control,
taking into account the spread of infection, and the conditions of
venue, while the nationwide voluntary restraint shall not be
requested at this time.
d) Provide appropriate information and support to Japanese who
are staying in countries where the infection is spreading.
e) Provide appropriate and prompt information to the public,
foreign governments and foreign tourists, to prevent the spread
of infection in Japan, and to prevent rumors.
(2) Understanding the situation of infection in Japan (surveillance
(onset trend survey))
A) Measures being taken
a) Identify suspected patients based on notification from
physicians based on the Infectious Diseases Control Law, and
conduct PCR tests when the physician deems necessary.
Identify close contacts of confirmed patients through active
epidemiology surveys, in accordance with the Infectious
Diseases Control Law.
b) Improve laboratory functions at the institutions concerned
such as local public health institutes (including private testing
institutes).
c) Ensure appropriate information sharing including those
related to patients between prefectural departments of public
health and education.
B) Measures to be taken
〇 Establish the surveillance system to grasp the epidemic
situation in Japan, while switching to use of PCR test for the
confirmation of diagnosis necessary to treat pneumonia patients
who require hospitalization, in communities where the number
of patients continues to increase.
5
(3) Measures to control the infection
A) Measures being taken
a) Take the following measures in accordance with the
Infectious Diseases Control Law if a patient is identified by
notification of a physician or other means: the active
epidemiology survey to be conducted by the public health
center; and close contacts to be monitored for their health
conditions and requested to refrain from going out.
The local government shall use active epidemiology surveys
to identify a cluster based on individual patient outbreaks in
cooperation with the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare
and experts, and request the necessary measures including
closure of the related facilities and voluntary restraint of events
if there is a possibility that such a cluster exists.
b) Take general infection prevention measures in facilities such
as facilities for the elderly.
c) Take general infection prevention measures at public
transportation facilities, roadside stations, and other facilities
where a large number of people gather.
B) Measures to be taken
a) In communities where the number of patients continues to
increase.;
・Switch to broader calls for refraining from going out,
while reducing the scale of active epidemiology surveys
and health observations on close contacts.
・Continue and strengthen the responses to clusters of
patients, depending on the situation in the community.
b) Prefectural governments, etc., shall request schools and other
institutions to take appropriate measures including
presentation of infection control policies at their facilities and
temporary closures of schools.
6
(4)Health system to deliver medical care (consultation centers,
outpatient, and hospitalization)
A) Measures being taken
a) Establish and operate 24-hour Call Centers for Japanese
Returnees and Potential Contacts who suspect for their infection
with the novel coronavirus.
b) Encourage people to contact the Call Center for Japanese
Returnees and Potential Contacts, which refer suspected
patients to outpatient facilities from the viewpoint of accurately
grasping the situations of outbreak and preventing the further
spread, as seeking medical care without consulting due to the
anxiety from potential infection may lead to increased risk of
infection.
c) Report a suspected case of the novel coronavirus disease
found at the outpatient facility for Japanese returnees and
potential contacts in accordance with the Infectious Diseases
Control Law, and conduct the PCR test. As appropriate, follow
hospitalization procedures in accordance with the Infectious
Diseases Control Law.
d) Secure beds and mechanical ventilators in medical
institutions in preparation for the potential increase of patients.
e) Provide health professionals with appropriate information on
treatment while also engaging in development of treatment,
drugs, vaccines, and rapid diagnostic test kits.
B) Measures to be taken
a) Accept suspected patients of the novel coronavirus infection
at outpatient facilities of general medical institutions after fully
implementing the infection control measures including
separating treatment hours and the flow of patients, in
communities where the number of patients have significantly
increased. (Local communities should discuss and consider in
advance the medical institutions that do not accept the suspected
cases of the novel coronavirus infection (i.e.: dialysis and
obstetric medical institutions, etc.)). At the same time,
7
outpatient care for Japanese returnees and potential contacts is
to be gradually reduced starting from the designated medical
institutions for infectious diseases, which are expected to
receive a large number of severe cases.
Patients with mild flu-like symptoms should stay at home
unless otherwise specified, and seek medical care after
consulting the call center or a family doctor, if their conditions
change. The elderly and those with underlying diseases are
encouraged to seek appropriate medical care at the early stage,
given their vulnerability to the infection.
Establish the system in advance where elderly persons with
no flu-like symptoms, or persons with underlying diseases who
are receiving ongoing treatment and medication, can receive
necessary care such as their prescriptions without visiting
medical institutions as much as possible, including by phone,
from the view of infection control.
b) Establish a system for providing appropriate hospitalized
medical care, including by securing beds and mechanical
ventilations, and assigning roles to medical institutions in the
community (i.e., arrangement of medical institutions that give
priority to severe cases requiring intensive care, etc.),
considering the possibility of further increases in patients and
the characteristics of the novel coronavirus disease.
c) Strengthen infection control measures and secure essential
goods for controlling the infection in medical institutions.
d) Take general infection control measures thoroughly to
prevent the infection from spreading in the facilities for the
elderly if there is a suspected case of the novel coronavirus
infection, while ensuring the smooth transition to hospitalized
medical care for those with the high risk.
(5)Border control measures
Based on the viewpoint of preventing a sudden inflows of
infected persons into Japan, current entry restrictions and the
8
recommendation for travel suspension will remain in effect.
Meanwhile, from the viewpoint of securing medical
resources in Japan, quarantine operations will be shifted,
according to measures to prevent the spread of infection in
Japan and systems for providing medical care.
(6)Others
a) Request related businesses to ramp up production and ensure
the smooth supply of masks, disinfectants, etc.
b) Call on consumers and businesses to remain calm and refrain
from overstocking, to ensure there are enough masks and other
goods necessary for the people.
c) Maintain close international cooperation and gather
information on how the WHO and other countries are
responding to the situation. Actively share the knowledge
obtained in Japan with the WHO and related institutions, and
use it for future countermeasures.
d) Take necessary measures for children who have temporarily
returned from China, including supporting their acceptance and
preventing bullying at schools.
e) Act with due consideration to the human rights of patients
and those involved in the infection control activities.
f) Prevent problems at airports, ports, medical institutes, etc., by
exercising vigilance as necessary.
g) Prevent various crimes that capitalize on chaos while
strengthening the enforcement.
5. Way forward
Going forward, based on these Basic Policies, the Ministry of
Health, Labour and Welfare and other ministries and agencies will
collaborate sequentially to give details for each measure, such as
issuing necessary notifications to relevant persons, etc., regarding
matters under their jurisdiction in view of anticipated future.
The Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare will first indicate the
9
timing to switch each measure for each region, and then the local
government will make a decision while consulting with the
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, and will take the optimal
measure according to the actual situation in the region. Measures
are to be implemented in coordination with the local governments
and other related persons.
If future development or new scientific knowledge necessitates
the revisions to these Basic Policies, they will be updated and
substantiated each time in the Headquarters for Novel Coronavirus
Disease Control, taking into account discussions by meeting of
experts.
