Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
PPE waste from home healthcare workers treating
patients with COVID-19: RPS C5
Published 15 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home PPE waste from home healthcare workers treating patients with COVID-19: RPS C5
Normally personal protective equipment (PPE) waste from healthcare workers treating patients in their own homes would
be:
Contents
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
Conditions you must comply with
Enforcement
When to check back
Contact the Environment Agency
coded as healthcare waste (18 01 03* if infectious, or 18 01 04 if non-infectious)
collected separately from the patient’s home through a courier collection service, or taken back to the relevant NHS
England (NHSE) hospital or practice for disposal
As more people with COVID-19 (or suspected COVID-19) will need healthcare in their own homes we have produced this
COVID-19 regulatory position statement (RPS) to minimise the:
need for multiple separate collections ofPPE waste from households
risk of healthcare workers transmitting COVID-19 by takingPPE waste back to an NHSE hospital or practice
If they follow the conditions in this COVID-19RPS, NHSE healthcare workers treating patients with (or suspected) COVID-
19 in their own homes can dispose of PPE waste through the householder’s normal non-recyclable waste collection.
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
This COVID-19 RPS only applies to PPE waste generated by NHSE healthcare workers treating patients with (or
suspected) COVID-19 in their own homes.
This COVID-19 RPS does not apply to any other activity, even if it is under the same legislation. You may still need other
permits or licences for other activities you carry out.
Conditions you must comply with
You can only dispose ofPPE waste through the householder’s black bag waste collection if you comply with the following
conditions.
You can only put disposablePPE into the householder’s bin for non-recyclable waste – this typically includes aprons,
gloves and masks (including fluid repellent items).
You must also follow the currentPublic Health England (PHE) household guidance on cleaning and disposal of waste that
could be infected with COVID-19.
This guidance states that you must securely store the PPE waste in disposal rubbish bags. You must place these bags in
another bag. You must tie this bag securely and keep it separate from other waste. This waste must be set aside for at
least 72 hours before being put in the usual external household bin for non-recyclable waste.
If PHE changes its guidance on COVID-19 and the disposal of household waste, we will review this COVID-19RPS and if
necessary withdraw or amend it.
You must make sure your activities do not endanger human health or the environment.
You must not:
cause a risk to water, air, soil, plants or animals
cause a nuisance through noise or odours
adversely affect the countryside or places of special interest
Places of special interest include but are not limited to:
European sites (Special Areas of Conservation and Special Protection Areas)
Ramsar sites
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
national and local nature reserves
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Marine Conservation Zones
National Parks
Enforcement
A COVID-19 RPS means that the Environment Agency will not normally take enforcement action against eitherNHSE
healthcare workers or patients provided:
your activity meets the description set out in this COVID-19RPS
you comply with the conditions set out in this COVID-19RPS
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
your activity does not, and is not likely to, cause environmental pollution or harm human health
If you operate under this COVID-19 RPS, but think you may no longer be able to comply with its conditions, you must
tell
the Environment Agency immediately.
When to check back
This COVID-19 RPS will be withdrawn on 30 June 2020 unless we extend it. After this date you must dispose of
PPE
waste following the requirements of Chapter 18 of the European Waste Catalogue regarding healthcare waste.
Contact the Environment Agency
General enquiries
National Customer Contact Centre
PO Box 544
Rotherham
S60 1BY
Email
enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk
Telephone
03708 506 506
Telephone from outside the UK (Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm GMT)
+44 (0) 114 282 5312
Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm.
Due to the impact of COVID-19 on our teams you may experience some delays in responses as most of our staff will be working from
home. The best way to contact us is by email (enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk) rather than the postal address.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
