If a member of your family is suspected of the novel Coronavirus
infection, we ask that you follow these points.
 The infected person should be placed in a own room. Avoid sharing
one room with the infected person when eating and sleeping.
・Even if you cannot separate the infected person’s room/living space with other rooms due to
the needs of child care or the space capacity, keep a distance of at least 2 meters from the
infected person. Also use partitions and curtains, etc.
・If there is a case to sleep in the same room, sleep with both heads staggered.
The infected person should avoid going to other rooms/living space.
・Minimize his/her use of shared space such as toilet, bathroom, etc..
Segregate rooms
 People with disease in heart, lung, or kidney, people with diabetes or
reduced immunity, pregnant women, etc. should avoid taking care of
the infected person.
Limit persons responsible for caring for infected patients
as much as possible
 The used mask should be immediately thrown away without taking it
to another room.
 Do not touch surface of used mask. Remove it by pinching off the
rubber or string.
 After removing your mask, always wash your hands with soap.
(Alcohol disinfectant is also effective)
※If your mask gets dirty, immediately use a new, clean, dry mask.
※If you don’t have a mask, cover your mouth and nose with tissue, etc. when coughing or sneezing.
Wear a facial mask
 Each family member should frequently wash their hands with soap
and disinfect with alcohol. Do not touch your eyes, nose, mouth, etc.
before washing your hands.
Wash your hands often
To the back
（Partially modified the summary provided by Japanese Society for Infection Prevention and Control）
February 28,2020 version
 Regularly ventilate rooms. Keep open windows as well as the
rooms where other family members are.
Ventilate the room
 Wipe the share parts (the door handles, knobs, and bed fences )
with Diluted household chlorine bleach, then wipe them with
water.
・The virus survives for a while on objects.
・Confirm that the main component of household chlorine bleach is hypochlorite, then adjust its
concentration to 0.05%.(if the concentration of the product is 6%, add 25ml of the liquid to 3
liters of water)
 Clean toilets and bathrooms frequently. Use a common type of
household detergent, and after rinsing, disinfect well with a
household disinfectant.
・ Towels, clothing, tableware, chopsticks, spoons, etc., should be washed as usual.
・No need to wash separately any clothes the infected person used.
 Do not share the one before cleaning.
・In particular, make sure towels are not shared in toilets, washrooms, kitchens, etc.
Disinfect shared surface that touched by hand
 Use gloves and masks when touching clothes and linen
contaminated with bodily fluids. Also wash them by a laundry
machine with a common type of household detergent and dry
them completely.
・Virus may be detected in feces.
Wash dirty line and clothes
 Put used paper tissue in a plastic bag, then seal them when
you take them out of the room. After that, wash your hands
immediately.
Dispose of garbage in a sealed bag
 The infected person should avoid going out.
 Family members and those living together should monitor
your own health by measuring fever, etc. and avoid
unnecessary and urgent outgoing. Do not go to office, etc.
especially if you have symptoms such as coughing or fever.
