مركز أبوظبي | عاقله ث0 لهم

تصيم خارجي رقب ما( ‎External Cireular‏

 

ا

نم جديد

‘Navel coronavirus (2019- nGoV) slert

HEALTH CENTRE | d.oLodi a.
12020
‏يشان‎
‏إخطار صوص‎
‏تدية طيية يسان‎
‏امع قزايد إنتشار حالات فيروس كورونا للجديد قي الصين وبعض الدول‎

 

الاخري» يؤكد مركز لبوظبي للصحة العامة على جميع المينيين
الصحيين ‎La gun gh ual‏ يعارة أبوظبي بضرورة

تطبيق مايلر.

‎CoS ce gual GUY‏ المشنيه بها أو الموكدة
بفيروس كرروتا الجديد وفك بلختيل ‎Ooourrence oF any‏
‎unusual diseases‏ من قائمة الأمراض السارية في موقع

‎al‏ الإلكتروني للأمراض المعنية (امنحق 1 تعريف للحالق)

‎(hatps:/opmvreb.haad.ae/usermanagement (

‎Dy hed Bo‏ الإحتينطات اللازمة لمكائحة الأمراض
المنقولة عن منريق الرذلا و للمنقولة عن طربق الثلامس أثناء.
التعامل مع أي مريض قر جثة متوقي مصاب ياعر اضن الفيروس.

‏إمرفق إحتياقات مكافحة العدوى اتموصس بها لملحق 2).

‎ 

‏يع الأصار: 2020/9/30

‎Greetings,

‎In regards to the increasing number of the novel
coronavirus (2019-ntov) cases lo China and ather
countries, Abu. Ohabi Puble Heslth Center
‘mphasizes thal all heath care providera adhere

‎betow:

‎= Report any suspected or confirmed case of
2018-nca¥ (atoched « the case definition, Appendix
1) immediate to ADPHE through the infectious
notification system

‎diseases electronic

‎Ihtips/fopmweb head ae/useemanagement] by
selecting Occurrence of ny unusual diseases from the

‎Infectious diseases list

‎+ Practice standard, contact and atbarne infection
control preceutions for patients or dead bodies
with known or suspected 2019 nCovt fAthached
are the recommended infection control measures,

‎Append 2)

‏عام علاقلام ©
مركر أبوظبي | ‎AAU OHABLPUBUC‏
اللمحة العامة | 661786 06010

‘Fallow the guidelines (appendix 3.4.5} of the ‏تباج الإرشادات الواردة في الملحق (3,4,5) وتثمل:‎ «

fallowing:

1 تصنيف الحالات المشتبهة بقير وس كورونا الجديد ‎A. suspected 2019 CoV case management‏
2. إرشادات الفحص تلعالات الإيجابية تيه

2. clinleal pathway and testing fo postive caves ‏تصنيق المخالطين و فحصهم‎ 3

3. contacts tracing and testing

لاك بن فكم حسن تعاوفكم ما ‎‘Thank you for your cooperation,‏

nt au Je

مدير علم مركز ليوظبي للصحة العامة

ماوع مهد
امرسي 0 ‎Updated case defirion‏ .1
‎Sema 1‏ 0 0
‎md ada tals 2‏ الوامب اتخاها لعاات الشننهه. ‎Case assessment For Suspected 2018 CoV‏ .3
3 امخطط نيم الحانات امشنبهة روس وروت اليد ‎Creal care pathway‏
‎Management af cose contacts MLE grid 4‏ و
‎ca genta |S‏

تاريخ الإصبار: 2020/1/30

© PUBLIC’ pL_e
مركم أبوظبي | علالاة 0/008 لمهم
للمحة العامة | ‎wear centre‏

Annex (1)

Case Definition for Novel Coronavirus 2019-nCoV

 

Suspected 2019-nCoV case is defined a

| person with upper or lower respiratory illness AND any of the following

‘| A istory of travel to Ching in the 14 days priar to symptom onset.

‘© severe acute respiratory infections (SARI}* with no athar lab result that explains
illness

+ The disease occurs in a health eare warker who has been warking in an environment
where paticnts with severe acute Yespiratery infections are being cared for, without
regard to place of residence or history of travel

‘© The person develops an unusual or unexpected clinical course, especialy sudden
deterloration despite appropriate treatment, without regard to place of residence or
history of travel, even if another etlology has been identified that fully explains the
clinical presentation.

‘Close physical contact with a confirmed case of nCaV infection while that patient
was symptomatic

 

Confismed 2019+ nCoV Case:

‘case with laboratory confirmed diagnostic evidence of nCoV infection

 

Laboratory Criteria tor Diagno:

‘Polymerase Chain Reaction (AT-PCR} from respiratory saraple
+ Serologle assay in acute & convalescent samples

PUBLIC / oe a!
مركز أبوظبي | عنائناة عماه لاقم
للصحة العامة | 80186 70افةلا

urements for a novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV}

 

Annex (2)

Infection prevention

Ravte of transmisclon uniovown but suspected to be respiratory)

Recommendations
‘+ Place patients in adequately ventilated single rooms.
‘© When single reams are net available, hort

patients suspected of nCov infection together.

‘© Otfera medical mask for suspected nCoV Infection
for those who can tolerate f.

‘+ Educate them on importance of covering nese and
‘mouth during coughing or sneezing with tissue or
Hlexed elbow.

4 Avold the movement and transport of patients out
of the room or ares unless medically necessary

‘Limit the number of HCWs, family members and
visitorsin contact with apatient with suspected
COV infection,

4 Maintain a record of all persons enteving the
patient's room including all staff and visitors

‘Rational, correct, and consistent use of PPE and
appropriate hand hygiene helps to reduce the
spread of the pathogens,

‘PPE effectiveness depends on adequate and regular
supplies, adequate staff training, proper hand
hygiene and specifically appropriate human
behavior. Use PPES as per standard, contact and
airbomne precautions requirement:

= Perform hand hygiene before and after contact with
the patient and his or her surroundings and ater
PPE removal

+ Ensure that healthcare workers performing aerosol
_penerating procedures (Le. spleatian or open
uetioning of respiratory tract specimens,
Intubation, cardiopulmonary resuscitation,

wa

 

 

 

[component
Patient placement

Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE)

Hand hygiene

 

‘Aerosol generating
procedures

 

© PUBLIC /eL_—«

 

 

 

 

 
مركز أبوظبي | عنهلم ,هماه ناقة
صحة العامة | ‎HEALTH CENTRE‏

bronchoscopy) healtieare workers should wear afr
tested N95 mask, eye protection, gloves and
impermeable apron/gown}

Perform praceduresin an adequately ventilated
oom or negative pressuce room with at least 12 air
changes per hour

Umit number of persons present in the room to the
‘ninimum required for the patient's care and
support.

Ensure that all materials wsed is disposed
aepropriately

Disinfect work areas and possible spills of blood or
Infectious badly Aus with chlorine-based solutions
Use either single use disposable equipment or
dedicated equipment {e.g stethoscopes, blood
pressure cuffs and thermometers).

equipment neads to be shared among patients,
<lean and disinfect between each patient use.

 

 

Waste management

 

Disinfection of surfaces
fequipment’s

“Additional contact and airborne precautions should continue until the patient is

asymptomnatle

عسسام /ولاقلام ©

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

wash BE + adi Qty
‏د‎ yay rm (ABW DHABHPLBLIC | 44 ‏هرد‎
‏تت‎ Sean ‏ا | ف‎ vy

 

 

 

 

ans?

1 1

+ ait tae peter cantat &sirorne precautions
1+ Tet lor nfluenss ene ol other comman respiratory vrata oni ngaive thes

ape 2019 nC
1
Polanco
isolate preferably under negative pressurefimplement sick standard,

‘contact & sithomne precautions.
+ Collect samples & send to Central tab defined by ctrcalar for mcoY PCR resting

 

 

 

 

  

Postal

 

 

 

       

ee ate ae esate wth
Serf eet of mand eat foo 38
coh

eat ete 1 ‘This flowchart may change as further information emerges. ‏مسي‎

7

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

.
- فرخز أيوطبي | نالك يقس ناهد
خط تمت 2

   

Clase Contact af s confirmed 2019-nCa¥

 

 

Contact tracing process is supervised and reported to ADPHC, outbreak response team

veriont/2-2020

a
