KCDC Issues Influenza Epidemic Alert [Nov.16]
Contact: Hye-rim Lee, Division of Infectious Disease Control (043-719-7127)

◇ KCDC issued influenza epidemic alert on Friday Nov. 16, 2018
◇ General public advised to receive vaccinations and those
experiencing influenza-like illnesses urged to seek treatment
◇ Washing hands and covering mouth and nose when coughing and
sneezing are important steps to prevent additional spread of infection

□ The Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC) iss

ued an influenza epidemic alert on Friday, November 16th in respon
se to the number of patients with influenza-like illnesses* in the 45t
h week of 2018 (Nov. 4-Nov. 10) surpassing the epidemic risk thre
shold**. KCDC advises all individuals to maintain proper hygiene pr
actices, such as frequent hand washing and cough etiquette.
* Influenza-like illnesses: those with a fever of 38℃ or higher and cough or sore throat
** 2018-2019 seasonal influenza epidemic risk threshold: 6.3 persons/1,000
population (2017-2018 season: 6.6 persons/1,000 population)
43rd week (Oct.
21-Oct. 27); 5.7 in 44th week (Oct. 28-Nov. 3); 7.8 in 45th week주(Nov. 4-Nov. 10), a value higher than the threshold
of 6.3, prompting an influenza epidemic alert two weeks earlier than last year (Dec.1, 2017)

Number of persons per 1,000 population with influenza-like illnesses in 2018: 4.9 in

□ To prevent additional spread of influenza infection, KCDC urges any
individuals who have not yet received their vaccinations to do so as
soon as possible.
* Flu vaccination coverage: 66.9% in children 6 months-12 years of age , 82.7% in adults
65 years or older

○ Local governments are asked to notify their communities that free

vaccinations for the elderly will continue to be administered at community
health centers after Friday, November 16th.

○ Unvaccinated children aged 6 months-12 years are advised to get
vaccinated within the month of November.

○ All other high risk populations, including pregnant women, and healthy

individuals of all ages are also advised to receive vaccinations.
□ While the influenza epidemic alert is in effect, health insurance cover
s antiviral treatment expenses for high-risk populations, even without
prior testing. As such, individuals who experience influenza-like symp
toms (fever of 38℃ or higher and cough or sore throat) are urged to seek
medical treatment as soon as possible at their nearest healthcare facility.
□ KCDC also requests cooperation in strengthening influenza prevention
measures in childcare centers, schools, and nursing homes.
○ To prevent the spread of influenza among young children and students,
those infected are asked to refrain from attending childcare centers, schools,
or other academic facilities until the following conditions are met:
-Five days have passed since the onset of symptoms
-An absence of fever for at least 48 hours without the use of medication
○ To prevent the spread of influenza among the elderly, staff and personnel
working at nursing homes and similar facilities are advised to receive
vaccinations and to take the following measures:
-Strengthen monitoring of influenza symptoms
-Restrict visitations from those who have respiratory symptoms
-Separate individuals who exhibit influenza-like symptoms

□ KCDC urges the public to follow proper personal hygiene measures,
such as frequent hand washing and cough etiquette, to help protect
themselves from influenza infection.

◀ Personal Hygiene Guidelines ▶

◇ Wash hands frequently

- Wash hands with under running water with soap for at least 30
seconds, especially after going outdoors, sneezing, coughing, blowing
your nose, using the restroom, before and after eating, and before and
after changing diapers

◇ Follow cough etiquette

-Cover your nose and mouth with a tissue or your sleeves when
coughing or sneezing
- Wash your hands after coughing
- Wear a mask if you have a severe cough
- Properly dispose of any used tissues or masks

◇ Avoid touching your eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands

