Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Storing treated sewage sludge you cannot move
because of COVID-19 restrictions: RPS C6
Published 16 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Storing treated sewage sludge you cannot move because of COVID-19 restrictions: RPS C6
This COVID-19 regulatory position statement (RPS) only applies to sludge producers who store their dewatered treated
Contents
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
Conditions you must comply with
Enforcement
When to check back
Contact the Environment Agency
sludge not at the place it will be used.
If you follow the conditions in this COVID-19RPS you can store dewatered treated sludge without an environmental
permit.
You must get written agreement from your Environment Agency water company account manager before you use this
COVID-19 RPS.
Sludge has the same meaning as in the Sludge Use in Agriculture Regulations (
SUiAR):
“Sludge means residual sludge from sewage plants treating domestic or urban waste waters and from other sewage plants
treating waste waters of a composition similar to domestic and urban waste waters.”
You must do a risk assessment to identify the environmental risks. You must make sure you adequately address these
risks before you store any sludge.
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
This COVID-19 RPS only applies if you:
are unable to move treated sludge to agricultural land for use underSUiAR
can demonstrate that you have already taken all reasonable steps
Reasonable steps include:
contingency planning to avoid or minimise disruption to your business because of COVID-19
emergency response planning to minimise the impact and duration of not complying with your permit or exemption
This COVID-19 RPS does not apply to any other activity, even if it is under the same legislation. You may still need other
permits, exemptions or licences for other activities you carry out.
Conditions you must comply with
You must:
only store dewatered treated sludge which meets the descriptions inWaste codes for sewage sludge and sludge
containing other materials: RPS 231 – this does not include septic tank sludge (which can go to a sewage works) and
waste containing sewage sludge (which is covered by the Environmental Permitting Regulations)
only store sludge which has been treated in line withSUiAR, Sewage sludge in agriculture:Code of practice for
England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and the Safe Sludge Matrix
as the sludge producer, remain in control of the stored treated sludge
meet all of the environmental protection requirements of theS3 waste exemption except for the storage limit and the
requirement to store the treated sludge at the place where it will be used
only store treated sludge where the dewatered treated sludge is stackable – this means the material is solid enough to
be stacked in a free-standing heap without slumping and does not allow free drainage from within the stacked material
You must comply with all the other requirements of your environmental permit or exemption. You must keep records that
show why you needed to use this COVID-19 RPS. For example, records of:
staff absences
contractors being unavailable to deliver sludge to farms
supply chain failures
You must keep these records for 24 months after this COVID-19RPS expires, including any extensions to it. You must
make them available to the Environment Agency on request.
You must make sure your activities do not endanger human health or the environment.
You must not:
cause a risk to water, air, soil, plants or animals
cause a nuisance through noise or odours
adversely affect the countryside or places of special interest
Places of special interest include but are not limited to:
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
European sites (Special Areas of Conservation and Special Protection Areas)
Ramsar sites
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
national and local nature reserves
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Marine Conservation Zones
National Parks
You must continue to notify us of any performance issues or pollution incidents as required by your permit.
Enforcement
This COVID-19 RPS means that the Environment Agency will not normally take enforcement action against you provided:
your activity meets the description set out in this COVID-19RPS
you comply with the conditions set out in this COVID-19RPS
your activity does not, and is not likely to, cause environmental pollution or harm human health
you have taken all reasonable steps to comply with your permits or exemptions
If you operate under this COVID-19 RPS and think you may no longer be able to comply with its conditions you must tell
your water company account manager immediately.
The Environment Agency will monitor how operators use and comply with this COVID-19RPS through its proportionate,
risk-based inspection and monitoring activity.
When to check back
This COVID-19 RPS will be withdrawn on 30 June 2020 unless we extend it. After this date you must comply with your
permits.
Contact the Environment Agency
Contact your water company account manager to get written agreement to use this COVID-19RPS.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
