Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: epidemiology, virology and clinical
features
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: background information
Public Health
England
1. Epidemiology
On 31 December 2019, the World Health Organization (
WHO) was informed of acluster of cases of pneumonia of
unknown cause detected in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China.
On 12 January 2020 it was announced that a novel coronavirus had been identified in samples obtained from cases and
Contents
1. Epidemiology
2. Virology
3. Transmission
4. Clinical features
that initial analysis of virus genetic sequences suggested that this was the cause of the outbreak. This virus is referred to
as SARS-CoV-2, and the associated disease asCOVID-19.
As of 3 April 2020 (10:00am), more than 1,000,249 cases have been diagnosed globally, with over 51,515 fatalities. In the
15 days to 3 April, over 784,700 cases were reported.
The WHO coronavirus dashboard has country by country information.WHO also publishes a daily international situation
report.
The total number of confirmed cases in the UKis published by the Department of Health and Social Care, and is available
in a visual dashboard.
2. Virology
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses with some causing less-severe disease, such as the common cold, and others
causing more severe disease such as Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
(SARS) coronaviruses.
2.1 Nomenclature and characterisation
On 11 February, WHO named the syndrome caused by this novel coronavirusCOVID-19 (Coronavirus Disease 2019)
using its best practice guidance.
The Coronavirus Study Group (CSG) of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruseshas designated the
aetiological agent ‘severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2’ (SARS-CoV-2). Characterisation of SARS-CoV-2 is
ongoing. Initial information shared by China and WHO indicates that SARS-CoV-2 is a beta-coronavirus that is genetically
similar to SARS-like coronaviruses obtained from bats in Asia.
3. Transmission
The source of the outbreak has yet to be determined. Preliminary investigations identified environmental samples positive
for SARS-CoV-2 in Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan City, however, some laboratory-confirmed patients did
not report visiting this market. A zoonotic source to the outbreak has not been identified yet, but investigations are
ongoing.
According to current evidence, theCOVID-19 virus is primarily transmitted between people through respiratory droplets
and contact routes.
Human-to-human transmission is occurring extensively. Hence, precautions to prevent human-to-human transmission are
appropriate for both suspected and confirmed cases (see infection prevention and control guidance).
In addition to respiratory secretions,SARS-CoV-2 has been detected in blood, faeces and urine.
In the context ofCOVID-19, airborne transmission may be possible in specific circumstances and settings in which
procedures or support treatments that generate aerosols are performed.
4. Clinical features
Fever, cough or chest tightness, myalgia, fatigue and dyspnoea are the main symptoms reported.
A variety of abnormalities may be expected on chest radiographs, but bilateral lung infiltrates appear to be common
(similar to what is seen with other types of viral pneumonia).
Public Health England has issued guidance on the investigation and initial clinical management of possible cases
.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
