HIGHLIGHTS
• After a comprehensive review, and in view of the Lockdown measures
having led to significant gains in the COVID-19 situation in the country,
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Government of India (GoI) issued an
Order under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 to further extend the
Lockdown for a further period of 2 weeks with effect from May 4, 2020,
details here.
• Union Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has issued an order to allow the
movement of migrant workers, pilgrims, tourists, students and other
persons, stranded at different places across the country, by special trains
to be operated by Ministry of Railways (MoR), details here.
• WHO Field staff is supporting the States/UTs through the MoHFW to
demarcate containment zones, implementing perimeter control, active
search for cases through the house to house surveillance by special
teams formed for the purpose, testing of all cases as per sampling
guidelines, contact tracing and clinical management of all confirmed
cases, details here.
INDIA SITUATION
• As of 03 May 2020, 5:00PM, a total of 10 887 people have been cured, recovery rate at 27%. The
total number of confirmed cases is now 40 263, details here
Source: Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
SITUATION IN
NUMBERS
India
40 263 Confirmed
1306 Deaths
32 States/UTs
South-East Asia
60 490 Confirmed
2256 Deaths
Globally
3 267 184 Confirmed
229 971 Deaths
WHO Classification
India - Clusters of cases
WHO GLOBAL UPDATE
• WHO Information Network for Epidemics (EPI-WIN) has rapidly built an innovative analysis
capability to identify misleading sources, posts and narratives, and predict rising areas of concern
and information voids. For more on this, see the ‘Subject in Focus’ below, details here.
• Gearing up for the much needed COVID-19 vaccines, the World Health Organization today
organized a meeting of vaccine manufacturers and national regulatory authorities from its South-
East Asia Region, details here.
WHO COUNTRY UPDATE
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) continues to work closely with MoHFW, on preparedness and
response measures for COVID-19, including surveillance and contact tracing, laboratory diagnosis, risk
communications and community engagement, hospital preparedness, infection prevention and control
(IPC) and implementation of containment strategies.
• Co-ordination and Partnership: WHO facilitated the COVID-19 Information session for Ministers
with participation of the Union Minister of Health and Family Welfare on 30 April 2020.
• Laboratory testing: WHO is providing kits and reagents to COVID-19 testing laboratories through
ICMR to partly meet their huge testing requirement. So far, a total of 1,046,450 samples have been
tested as on 03 May 2020, 9 AM IST, details here.
• Surveillance: WHO Field staff supporting strengthening of ILI and SARI surveillance in all the
districts as per the government guidelines. Nodal Officers have been appointed to conduct active
case search for SARI cases in hospital in-patient records, in select states, daily.
• Research: WHO supported ICMR in revising the study protocol for the national sero-prevalence
survey for Covid-19. WHO Solidarity Trial for therapeutic treatment options for COVID-19 kicked off
with a series of trainings organized for the study sites.
• Risk Communication: MoHFW released ‘Awareness Material for front line workers of COVID-19’ in
multiple Indian languages, WHO and partners supported in the same. Video available here.
• Training: WHO field teams have trained nodal officers in States and Districts for filling CIF data in
the Integrated Health Information Platform and are also supporting IDSP units in filling CIF data.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
For all authentic & updated information on COVID-19 related technical issues, guidelines & advisories
please regularly visit: https://www.mohfw.gov.in/.
In case of any queries on COVID-19, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare helpline no.: +91-11-
23978046 or 1075 (Toll-free). Helpline numbers of States/UTs on COVID-19 available here.
FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
WHO Country Office for India I Telephone number: +91-11- 66564800 I Email: wrindia@who.int
