If you are 70 or over –
limit close contact with other people
If you are 70 or over, we recommend that you
limit close contact with other people and stay at
home as much as possible for a period of time.
The new COVID-19 virus has developed into a pan-
demic and is now spreading within Sweden. The experi-
ences of China and Italy, where the virus has been
spreading for a long time, show that people of 70 or over
are an at-risk group.
It is very important that you protect yourself and others
from being infected by COVID-19. By doing this, you
will also be helping our medical services, which are go-
ing to be under great pressure.
How to keep yourself healthy
We are urging people who are
70 or over to limit close contact with other people to
avoid infection. You should stop using public transport
and shops
and stop going to places where there are lots of other
people. Ask your family or neighbours to help with your
food shopping or other errands.
How to avoid infecting others
If you are unwell, even if you only have mild symptoms,
you must stay at home so that you can look after yourself
and avoid infecting others. Avoid close contact with
other people when you are unwell.
How to help our medical services
Limiting close contact with other people will mean that
fewer people will fall ill, which will reduce pressure on
medical services. If everyone
helps by doing this, we will be supporting our medical
services, which are going to have a heavy workload for a
limited period of time.
COVID-19 makes people feel generally unwell with one
or more of the following symptoms:
Keep strong – this will pass
It is normal to feel worried, uncertain, and lonely if you
are having to stay away from other people.
You can help yourself feel better by doing things such as
going out for walks, talking to your friends and family by
phone, and keeping in touch via your computer or on so-
cial media.
These restrictions on close contact with other people will
be in place for a set period of time. Try to keep yourself
occupied with things you enjoy doing.
• a cough
• a high temperature/fe-
ver
• shortness of breath
• cold symptoms
• a sore throat
• a headache
• aching muscles or
joints
• nausea
INFORMATION ABOUT COVID-19
Important telephone numbers
For general questions about COVID-19, call 113 13.
For medical advice, visit Vårdguiden healthcare guide at
www.1177.se
or call 1177; the line is open 24 hours a day.
If you feel worried, call the Äldrelinjen helpline for older
people: +46 (0)20-22 22 33. Monday to Friday 0800-19.00,
weekends 10.00-16.00.
At-risk groups
Studies relating to the COVID-19 outbreak show that the
main risk factor is older age. This means that if you are 70
or over, you are in an at-risk group.
Severe cases more often involve older people who also
have other conditions, such as high blood pressure, cardio-
vascular disease, pulmonary diseases, or diabetes.
Du
som
är
70
år
eller
äldre
20033-1
Engelska
