How to access government financial support if you
or your business has been affected by COVID-19
On 17 March, the Chancellor announced an unprecedented package of government-backed
and guaranteed loans to support businesses, making available an initial £330bn of guarantees
– equivalent to 15% of GDP.
This was on top of a series of measures announced at Budget 2020, the government announced
£30 billion of additional support for public services, individuals and businesses experiencing
financial difficulties because of COVID-19, including a new £5 billion COVID-19 Response Fund,
to provide any extra resources needed by the NHS and other public services to tackle the virus.
The government will take new legal powers in the COVID-19 Bill, enabling it to offer whatever
further financial support it thinks necessary to support businesses.
This document sets out further information on how you or your business can access if you are
experiencing financial difficulties because of COVID-19.
If you want the latest information on the government’s COVID-19 Action Plan you can go
here: gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-action-plan
If you want more information about the situation in the UK, along with guidance for what to
do if you think you’re at risk:
o Visit nhs.uk/conditions/coronavirus-covid-19/ for information about the virus and
how to protect yourself
o Use the NHS 111 online coronavirus service to check if you need medical help
o Visit gov.uk/guidance/coronavirus-covid-19-information-for-the-public for more
information
INFORMATION FOR INDIVIDUALS
If you think you are entitled to Statutory Sick Pay (SSP), please read the following information:
You can get £94.25 per week Statutory Sick Pay (SSP) if you’re too ill to work. It’s paid by your
employer for up to 28 weeks.
If you are self-isolating because of COVID-19: From 13 March, you can now claim SSP. This
includes individuals who are caring for people self-isolating in the same household and
therefore have been advised to do a household quarantine. To check your sick pay entitlement,
you should talk to your employer, and visit https://www.gov.uk/statutory-sick-pay for more
information.
• When does SSP apply? The government is legislating for SSP to be paid from day 1, rather
than day 4, of your absence from workif you are absent from work due to sickness or need
to self-isolate caused by COVID-19. Once the legislation has been passed, this will apply
retrospectively from 13 March. You should talk to your employer if you are eligible for SSP
and need to claim.
• Do I need a sick note? From Friday 20 March onwards, those who have COVID-19 or are
advised to self-isolate will be able to obtain an “isolation note” by visiting NHS 111 online
and completing an online form, rather than visiting a doctor. For COVID-19 cases this
replaces the usual need to provide a “fit note” after seven days of sickness absence. Isolation
notes will also be accepted by Jobcentre Plus as evidence of your inability to attend.
• What if I am self-employed or not eligible for SSP? If you are not eligible for SSP – for
example if you are self-employed or earning below the Lower Earnings Limit of £118 per
week – and you have COVID-19 or are advised to self-isolate, you can now more easily make
a claim for Universal Credit (UC) or new style Employment and Support Allowance. For more
information on how to claim, please visit https://www.gov.uk/universal-credit and
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/new-style-employment-and-support-allowance.
• What if I am self-employed and receiving Universal Credit? If you are self-employed and
receiving Universal Credit and you have COVID-19 or are advised to self-isolate, the
requirements of the Minimum Income Floor will be temporarily relaxed. This change took
effect on 13 March and will last for the duration of the outbreak, to ensure that self-
employed UC claimants will receive support.
If you need to claim Universal Credit but have COVID-19 or are self-isolating, you will now
be able to claim and to access advance payments upfront without needing to attend a
Jobcentre Plus. Please visit https://www.gov.uk/universal-credit for more information.
If you need to claim Universal Credit but have COVID-19 or are self-isolating, you will now
be able to claim and to access advance payments upfront without needing to attend a
Jobcentre Plus. Please visit https://www.gov.uk/universal-credit for more information.
If you are eligible for new style Employment and Support Allowance, it will now be payable
from day 1 of sickness, rather than day 8, if you have COVID-19 or are advised to self-isolate.
If you think you may need financial support from your Local Authority in England, you may be
entitled to support from the £500 million Hardship Fund:
• Most of this funding will be used to provide more Council Tax relief, either through
existing Local Council Tax Support schemes, or through similar measures.
• The Ministry for Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) will set out more
detail on this funding, including allocations, shortly.
• If you have any questions, please contact your Local Authority.
If you are experiencing financial difficulties meeting your mortgage repayments because of
COVID-19, you may be entitled to a mortgage or rental holiday for 3 months. This includes if
you are a landlord whose tenants are experiencing financial difficulties because of COVID-19.
If you are a tenant experiencing financial difficulties because of COVID-19, the government
will ensure you do not face the threat of eviction for at least 3 months:
• The government has agreed with mortgage lenders that they will offer repayment holidays
of 3 months to households in financial difficulty due to COVID-19.
• This will also apply to landlords whose tenants are experiencing financial difficulties
because of COVID-19.
• The offer of a payment holiday can be made available to customers who are up to date
with payments and not already in arrears.
• Customers who are concerned about their current financial situation should contact their
lender at the earliest possible opportunity to discuss if this is a suitable option for them.
• Emergency legislation will be taken forward so that landlords will not be able to start
proceedings to evict tenants for at least a 3 month period. This applies to private and
social renters.
• At the end of this period, landlords and tenants will be expected to work together to
establish an affordable repayment plan, taking into account tenants’ individual
circumstances.
If you are experiencing difficulties paying back personal loans or credit card bills as a result of
COVID-19, you should read the following information:
• The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) called on lenders to use flexibility built into their
rules to support consumers, taking into account customers’ individual circumstances.
Many major lenders have already made statements to this effect.
• If you are experiencing difficulties paying back loans or credit card bills because of COVID-
19, you should talk to your lender.
• If you agree a payment holiday with your lender, they should record these in such a way
that will not impact on your credit score.
INFORMATION FOR BUSINESSES
If you are a small- or medium-sized business, you may be entitled to reclaim the costs of
Statutory Sick Pay (SSP) for sickness absence due to COVID-19:
• This refund will cover up to two weeks’ SSP per eligible employee who are either ill or been
told to self-isolate because of COVID-19. This is in line with the recommended isolation
period. Guidance on self-isolation can be found here: www.nhs.uk/conditions/coronavirus-
covid-19.
• Employers with fewer than 250 employees will be eligible. The size of an employer will be
determined by the number of people they employed as of 28 February 2020.
• Employers will be able to reclaim expenditure for any employee who has claimed SSP
(according to the new eligibility criteria) as a result of COVID-19.
• Employers should maintain records of staff absences, but employees will not need to provide
a GP fit note.
• The eligible period for the scheme began on 13 March.
• The government will work with employers over the coming months to set up the repayment
mechanism for employers as soon as possible. Existing systems are not designed to facilitate
employer refunds for SSP.
Some businesses, including nurseries, in England will be eligible for a Business Rates holiday for
1 year from 1 April 2020:
• If you are currently receiving the retail discount for your Business Rates bill, you will receive
a revised bill with 100% relief shortly.
• If your business occupies a property in the retail sector with a rateable value of £51,000 or
more, or if your business occupies a property in the leisure or hospitality sectors you may
also be eligible for the 100% discount on your business rates bill.
• You will shortly hear from your Local Authority. If you have any questions, you should
contact your Local Authority.
• If you are a nursery, you will be entitled to the 100% relief for the next year. You should
contact your Local Authority for more information.
• Guidance for Local Authorities will be published by MHCLG by 20 March.
If your business is eligible for small business rate relief or rural rate relief in England, you are
entitled to a one-off cash grant of £10,000:
• If your business is in the retail, hospitality or leisure sector in England, then you may also be
entitled to a cash grant. If you have a property with a rateable value of less than £15,000
then you will be entitled to a grant of £10,000, whether or not you are entitled to small
business rate relief or rural rate relief. If you have a property with a rateable value of between
£14,999 and £51,000 then you will be entitled to a cash grant of £25,000.
• The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) will provide guidance for
Local Authorities on how to administer these grants shortly.
• If you are an eligible business, your Local Authority will then be in touch in the coming
weeks to provide details of how to claim this money.
If your small-or medium-sized business in England is facing cash flow issues as a result of
COIVD-19, please read the following information:
• A new temporary Coronavirus Business Interruption Loan Scheme, delivered by the British
Business Bank, will launch at the start of next week to support businesses to access bank
lending and overdrafts.
• The government will provide lenders with a partial guarantee of 80% on each loan to give
lenders further confidence in continuing to provide finance to SMEs.
• The government will not charge businesses or banks for this guarantee, and the Scheme will
support loans of up to £5 million in value. The first 6 months of these loans will be interest-
free, as the Government will cover these payments.
• Businesses will be able to get finance under the scheme from a large number of providers,
including the main high street banks, as of next week.
• Businesses will remain responsible for repaying any facility they take out.
• For further information, please visit: https://www.british-business-
bank.co.uk/ourpartners/coronavirus-business-interruption-loan-scheme-cbils/.
If you are a large business facing cash flow issues as a result of COIVD-19, you may want to
read the following information:
• Companies commonly sell short term debt (‘commercial paper’) to the market. This is a
quick and cost effective to raise working capital.
• The new COVID-19 Corporate Financing Facility means that the Bank of England will buy
short term debt from companies.
• This will support companies which are fundamentally strong, but have been affected by a
short-term funding squeeze, enabling them to continue financing their short-term liabilities.
It will also support corporate finance markets overall and ease the supply of credit to all
firms.
• Further details can be found here in the exchange of letters between the Governor of the
Bank of England and the Chancellor, found here:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/launch-of-covid-19-corporate-financing-
facility-ccff.
If you are self-employed or own a business and you are concerned about not being able to pay
your tax bills because of COVID-19, you may be eligible for support through Her Majesty’s
Revenue and Customs’ (HMRC) Time to Pay service:
• If you think you or your business is eligible for support through Time to Pay, you can call
the following helpline number to get practical help and advice: 0800 0159 559.
• These arrangements are agreed on a case-by-case basis and are tailored to individual
circumstances and liabilities.
• For more information, please check the HMRC site here:
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/tax-helpline-to-support-businesses-affected-by-
coronavirus-covid-19.
If you own a pub that serves food or a restaurant in England, you will be able to operate a hot
food takeaway to serve people staying at home, without going through the usual planning
process:
• The Ministry for Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) will shortly
legislate to bring forward a temporary Permitted Development Right to allow for change
of use from A3 (Restaurant) and A4 (Pub) to A5 (Hot Food Takeaway).
• The intention is that once the legislation has come into force a pub or restaurant will be
able to notify their Local Authority that they are now operating as a takeaway without
any prior approval.
If you contract your services to large- or medium-sized organisations outside of the public sector
you should read the following information:
• The government announced on 17 March that the reform to the off-payroll working
rules (commonly known as IR35) - that would have applied for people contracting their
services to large or medium-sized organisations outside the public sector - will be
delayed for one year from 6 April 2020 until 6 April 2021.
• Business and individuals do not need to take any action.
If the only barrier to your business making an insurance claim was a lack of clarity on whether
the government advising people to stay away from businesses, rather than ordering businesses
to shut down, was sufficient to make a claim on business interruption insurance:
• The government’s medical advice of 16 March is sufficient to enable those businesses
which have an insurance policy that covers both pandemics and government ordered
closure to make a claim - provided all other terms and conditions in their policy are met.
Businesses should check the terms and conditions of their specific policy and contact
their providers if in doubt.
• However, most businesses have not purchased insurance that covers pandemic related
losses. As such, any affected businesses should note the government’s full package of
support, including the Coronavirus Business Interruption Loan Scheme and business
rates holiday.
