HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 16th
of April 2020, 29 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,672.
• Of these, more than 59% (1,593) have recovered, about 1.7% (46)
have died, and about 40% (1,077) are receiving treatment.
• Of the newly reported cases, 2 were identified in people returning
from outside Thailand. To reduce transmission from imported cases,
all persons returning from other countries will be quarantined in
state-arranged venues.
• The total number of infected healthcare workers remains at 102 (4% of all cases). To protect healthcare
workers and the healthcare system, it is essential that everyone complies with measures to reduce
transmission of COVID-19.
• A total of 14 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed cases. Three of these cases
either attended crowded places or had occupational exposure to large numbers of people. Ten cases
remain under investigation.
• To date, 68 of the total 77 provinces have reported cases. Twenty-five provinces have not reported new
cases during the past 14 days.
• Bangkok has the highest number of cases (1,349), followed by Phuket (191) and Nonthaburi (148).
• The Civil Aviation Authority of Thailand (CAAT) has extended the restrictions on international flights to
Thailand until 30 April 2020.
• More information is available at https://www.caat.or.th/th/archives/49587
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,672 confirmed (29 new)
46 deaths (3 new)
1,077 people hospitalized
102 healthcare staff infected
1, 593 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 16 April 2020
UPDATE ON MEASURES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH OF THAILAND:
Guidelines for crowded places in the context of COVID-19
• In collaboration with academic experts, the Department of Health (DoH) has assessed several ‘at-risk’
(crowded) settings and developed guidelines for slums, construction sites and markets. The guidance and
related recommendations have been distributed to entrepreneurs and members of the public. DoH plans
to develop an online map showing markets that meet criteria for good hygiene arrangements.
Support for Persons with Disabilities (PWD)
• The Ministry of Public Health provides information about COVID-19 using sign and braille language
• Delivers medicines through postal services and provides telemedicine services
• Works closely with Village Health Volunteers to provide assistive devices and protective equipment
• Effective 20th
April PWDs who have registered will receive 1,000 Baht in financial assistance
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health
to support migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
People with disabilities need extra
consideration during the COVID-
19 outbreak.
Actions need to be taken to
ensure that people with
disabilities can always access the
health-care services, water and
sanitation services and public
health information they require.
