1
GUIDANCE DOCUMENT FOR POEs, STATES AND UTs FOR SURVEILLANCE OF 2019-nCoV
Situation Update (as on 25 January, 2020)
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), GoI is closely monitoring the outbreak
of respiratory illness caused by a novel (new) coronavirus (termed “2019-nCoV”) that was
first detected in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China and which continues to expand.
As 25th January 2020, a total of 1287 cases and 41 deaths were reported in 29 provinces
(districts and cities) of China. In addition, 28 cases have been confirmed outside Chinese
mainland: 5 cases in Hong Kong, 2 cases in Macao, 3 cases in Taiwan, 4 cases in Thailand (2
cases cured), 2 cases in Japan (1 case cured), 2 cases in South Korea, 2 cases in the United
States, 2 cases in Vietnam, 3 cases in Singapore, 1 case in Nepal and 2 cases in France.
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses, some causing illness in people and others that
circulate among animals, including camels, cats and bats. Rarely, animal coronaviruses can
evolve and infect people and then spread between people such as has been seen
with MERS and SARS.
Initially, many cases reported in the outbreak in Wuhan, China had some link to a large
seafood and animal market, suggesting animal-to-person spread. However, with increased
number of cases being reported without any history of exposure to animal markets,
suggests person-to-person transmission might be occurring. At this time, it’s unclear
whether the human to human transmission is sustainable or not.
Limited information is available to characterize the spectrum of clinical illness, however yet
modes of transmission, incubation period and period of communicability is unknown. No
vaccine or specific treatment for 2019-nCoV infection is available; supportive care is
recommended.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.
These guidelines have been developed based on what currently is known about the disease
and guidance from WHO. These are subject to change as additional information becomes
available at a short notice.
Risk assessment: WHO assesses the risk of this event to be very high in China, high at the
regional level and moderate at the global level.
Currently, WHO has not declared the situation as PHEIC.
Response from MoHFW(GoI):
• MoHFW is closely monitoring this situation in collaboration with WHO.
• MoHFW has initiated inflight announcements with regard to nCoV and entry
screening for travellers from 2019-nCoV affected countries (China) at designated
airports
• Mechanism for in country surveillance and contact tracing has been put in place
through Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme(IDSP), NCDC.
2
• Advisories for travellers visiting China and arriving from China have been issued.
• Public health preparedness including diagnostics, hospital preparedness, IPC,
response, logistics is being constantly reviewed.
• Risk Communication has been initiated and signages have been displayed at PoEs.
Scope of the guidance: It is mainly targeted towards health personnel involved in entry
screening at Points of Entries (designated Airports) and in community surveillance through
the mechanism of IDSP.
Objectives of the guidance:
• To establish system for screening of travellers from 2019 nCoV affected countries
(China) at Points of Entries:
o In flight announcement and filling of Self declaration form in the flight
(Annexure 1)
o Suspect case of 2019nCoV based on WHO case definition (identified during
screening at APHO) will be referred to designated Hospital and information
shared with CSU IDSP/NCDC immediately (Annexure 6).
o Close contacts of the suspect case (co passengers seated in the same row, 3
rows in front and 3 rows behind along with some of the cabin crew) –
Information be shared as per interim guidelines (page no. 5) in the format
(Annexure 2)
o List of passengers who have history of close contact (as per self declaration
form)will be shared to IH Division and State/District for in-country
surveillance by IDSP on daily basis.
• To establish In country/ community surveillance through the Integrated Disease
Surveillance Programme network(IDSP)
o SSU/DSU will receive line list / emails of Passengers under observation,
coming from 2019-nCoV affected countries* from APHO, Office of Emergency
Medical Relief, MEA or CSU and information collected in Format A & B.
(Annexure 3 & 4)
o Health Status of these passengers to be shared with CSU in Format C
(Annexure 5) as per SoPs (Page no. 3).
o Passengers who have history of close contact will be followed by IDSP
officials on daily basis.
o Close contacts of the suspect case – Information be shared as per interim
guidelines in the format (Annexure 2)
3
PROTOCOL FOR SENDING DAILY HEALTH STATUS OF PASSENGERS UNDER OBSERVATION
SOPs for SSOs
1) SSU will receive line list / emails of Passengers under observation, coming from
2019-nCoV affected countries* from APHO, Office of Emergency Medical Relief, MEA
or CSU.
2) SSU will share the line list / mails with DSUs immediately and Ensure immediate
tracing of Passengers under observation by DSUs.
3) Information regarding any passenger who travels to another State will be
immediately notified to the concerned State Health authority and comment shared
in Format C.
4) SSU will receive complete investigation details in enclosed Format A from DSU as
soon as possible on the same day.
5) SSU will ensure daily follow up of Passengers under observation for 28 days starting
from date of last exposure/arrival.
6) SSU to compile the line list of all Passengers under observation daily, updating daily
health status of Travelers / Suspects in enclosed Format B and share daily report of
health status of Passengers under observation with CSU / EMR daily (Format C).
7) If any passenger is not traceable initially or during any duration while being followed
up should be immediately notified to CSU.
All SSUs will keep themselves updated by routinely checking WHO and NCDC website on
2019-nCoV. Any guidelines shared by MoHFW on 2019-nCoV will be disseminated to
concerned State/District authorities.
SOPs for DSU
1) Receive line list/ email of Passengers under observation from SSU/CSU/APHO.
2) Immediately trace the Passengers under observation and begin investigation and fill
the enclosed format A. On first visit, passenger is to be provided a mask to be put on
immediately in case symptoms such as fever and cough develop.
3) Passenger will be provided following advice during first visit by Health care provider:
a. You will also receive daily calls/visit from health department to ask your health
status for the day, kindly cooperate with them.
b. You are requested to self-monitor for development of symptoms suggestive of 2019-
nCoV i.e. Fever and Cough for 28 days from the date of arrival from 2019-nCoV
affected countries*.
c. In case you initiation of symptoms (fever and cough), put on the mask immediately,
restrict your outdoor movement and contact 24 hours helpline number 011-
23978046. The Call operator will tell you whom to contact further. In the
meanwhile, keep yourself isolated in your house/room.
4) DSU has to ensure daily follow up of Passengers under observation for 28 days
starting from date of possible exposure/arrival. Passengers will also be counseled for
self-reporting of illness suggestive of 2019-nCoV.
4
5) Information regarding any passenger who travels to another District will be
immediately notified to the concerned District Health authority and SSU.
6) In case, Passengers under observation develop symptoms suggestive of ARI/ILI, S/he
has to be shifted to identified health facility with isolation unit (as transmission
pattern of the virus is still unclear).Laboratory guidelines will be shared soon.
7) Daily follow up of Passengers under observation to be continued for 28 days starting
from the date of last exposure/departure.
8) If any passenger is not traceable initially or during any duration while being followed
up should be immediately notified to SSU/CSU.
9) Daily health status to be shared with SSU every day by 12:00 PM.
*Currently China only.
Advisory:
1. Format C to be sent positively every day to idsp-npo@nic.inby 12:00 pm including
‘Nil’ report.
2. The passenger has to be observed from 28 days from the day of possible
exposure/arrival to India.
3. In case passenger develop any symptom, s/he will be requested to wear amask.
Health care provider will arrange for the transfer of such patient from home to
isolation facility. During the procedure, standard infection control practice for eg.
wearing mask and hand washing should be performed by Health care providers.
5
Interim Guidelines for community based Tracing and Management of Contacts for 2019- nCoV
Case
Contact tracing: the process
Contact tracing is the process of identifying, assessing, and managing people who have been
exposed to a disease to prevent onward transmission. People who may have been exposed
to 2019-nCoV are to be followed for 28 days from the date of the probable last
exposure/arrival from 2019-nCoV affected countries.
Any person who has had contact with a patient under investigation/treatment for
suspected, probable or confirmed case of 2019-nCoV (refer WHO case definition) should be
carefully monitored for the appearance of symptoms of 2019-nCoV.
Contact is defined as:
Anyone who provided care for the suspect or confirmed case, including a health care worker
or family member, or who had other similarly close physical contact;
Anyone who stayed at the same place (e.g. lived with, visited) while the suspect or
confirmed case was symptomatic.
Note: This should include health workers (including those involved in cleaning, waste
management, laboratory technicians, healthcare workers, etc.)
If symptoms of 2019-nCoV appear within the first 28 days following the contact, the
individual should be considered a probable case and reported through IDSP network to
NCDC.
Community based Contact Tracing Implementation Guidelines
1. As soon as the single event (identification of suspect or confirmed case) is detected, contact
tracing must be aggressively implemented (preferably to be completed within 48 hours).
2. The contact tracing shall preferably be done by visiting the local residence of the contact(s)
by a Health Personnel. Other methods of communication like telephone may be used in
certain circumstances or for follow-up.
3. On meeting the ‘contact person’ the visiting Health Personnel should introduce him (her)-
self, explain the purpose of contact tracing and should collect data in the prescribed format
(Annex).
4. Contact tracing must include identification of extended social networks and travel history of
cases during the 28 days after onset of illness.
5. Contacts of confirmed cases should be traced and monitored for at least 28 days after the
last exposure to the case patient for evidence of 2019-nCoV symptoms as per case
definition.
6. Information about contacts can be obtained from: a. Patient, his/her family members,
persons at patient’s workplace or school associates, or b. others with knowledge about the
patient’s recent activities and travels.
6
7. Case wise Line-listing (Performa enclosed at Annex) of all exposed contacts shall be
maintained with the following information: a. demographic information, b. date of last
exposure or date of contact with the case patient, c. date of onset of fever orother
symptoms developed, if any.
Advisory for Symptomatic contacts:
Refer persons with fever and cough and history of contact with a confirmed case within last 28 days
for:
1. Isolation for strict infection control
2. Collection and transportation of sample for laboratory testing at designated lab.
3. Appropriate medical care for management of patient.
Depending on the severity of illness, acceptability, and availability of hospital beds, ill contacts may
be isolated at a health-care facility or at home while awaiting test-results. However, once confirmed
by laboratory, such cases must be managed in a designated health facility.
Advisory for Asymptomatic Contacts:
• Remain at home (home quarantine) for at least 28 days after the last exposure with the
case.
• Initiate self-health monitoring for the development of fever or cough within 28 days after
the last exposure to the case patient and maintain a list of contacts on daily basis.
• If above described symptoms develop, person must put on the mask, self-isolate him in the
home and inform the identified Local Health Official/District CMO/DSO by telephone and
further management must be done at a designated health facility.
• Active monitoring (e.g. daily visits or telephone calls) for 28 days after the last exposure shall
be done by the identified Local Health Officials.
Health and safety precautions for the contact tracing official:
• Maintain a distance of at least 2 meter (as advised by WHO*) from the contact.
• Personal protective equipment (PPE) is not needed for Contact Follow-up Teams and should
not be worn. However, masks should be worn by the contact tracing team.
• Maintain standard infection prevention and control measures and hand washing should be
performed.
7
ANNEXURE 1 – SELF DECLARATION FORM
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Government of India
SELF REPORTING FORM
FOR ALL TRAVELLERS ARRIVING from 2019-nCoV affected countries*
(TO BE PRESENTED AT THE IMMIGRATION COUNTER)
All persons coming to India from 2019-nCoV affected countries are required to fill-up this proforma. You are requested to provide the following information to safeguard
your own health.
Personal Information Contact Address in India for Indian Nationals:
1 Name of the
passenger
Seat No. 3. Flight No.
4 Passport No.
5 Date of Arrival
6 Port of origin of
Journey
7 Port of final
destination
(PART-A)
I) During your visit to China, what all cities did you visit? _______________
II) Have you visited Wuhan city in Hubei province, China in last 14 days? Yes/ No
If yes, period and duration____________________________
III) In the Last 14 days during your visit, did you#
:
a. Visit any sea food/animal food market? Yes / No
b. Come in close contact of any person suffering from Fever and cough? Yes / No
c. Visit any health facility in China? Yes / No
IV) Are you suffering from any of the following symptoms**
• Fever Yes No
• Cough Yes No
• Respiratory distress Yes No
Signature of the passenger
*CHINA
#
If answer to any of the above questions is “yes”, Consider them as close contact.
**If answer to any of the above questions is “yes”, please present yourself to the Airport Health counter for preliminary
screening.
1 House Number
2 Street/ Village
3 Tehsil
4 District/ City
5 State
6 Pin
7 Residence Number
8 Mobile Number
9 E mail ID
8
In case you develop symptoms such as fever and cough within 28 days of leaving this airport, restrict your outdoor
movement and contact MoHFW’s24 hours helpline number 011-23978046. Call operator will tell you whom to contact
further. In the meanwhile, keep yourself isolated in your house/room.
9
ANNEXURE 2 – Format For Case-Wise Contact Listing And Follow – Up
Age
(yrs)
Sex (M/F)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
Date of Contact
Name
Case Information
Any other information
Day of follow - up (Put a 'X' if the contact has no symptom and put a '√' if the contact has one of the following symptoms
listed below)
Contact Information and follow up
S. No. Name Age
(yrs)
Sex
(M/F)
Address District Phone Number
Date of Symptom Onset
District
Address
10
ANNEXURE 3
Format A - for surveillance of Passenger for 2019-nCoV (To be filled by District Surveillance
Unit and send to SSU daily)
Full Name:
Age in years:
Gender:
Passport number:
Complete Address
(For Indian passport holders)
Place of Stay during visit to India
(For International tourists)
Landline number with STD code (In
India)
Mobile number (In India)
Countries visited in last 14 days
Date of arrival from 2019-nCoV
affected country to India
Passenger History:
Clinical details: write ‘N’ for No & ‘Y’ for Yes
Day Date Fever Cough Day Date Fever Cough
1 15
2 16
3 17
4 18
5 19
6 20
7 21
8 22
9 23
10 24
11 25
12 26
13 27
14 28
In case of any symptoms the passenger should be immediately isolated at designated hospital following
standard Infection, control practices.
Filled by…………………………..
11
ANNEXURE 4
Format B (Linelist of Format A from all DSU to be updated on daily basis by SSU)
NAME OF State:
➢ New passengers enrolled for observation:
➢ Cumulative number of Passengers under observation:
➢ No. of passengers who have completed 28 days observation period:
LINELIST FORMAT FOR REPORTING OF DAILY HEALTH STATUS OF PASSENGERS UNDER OBSERVATION
Sl.No. Name Age Gender Address Phone
District Country of
visit
Date of
departure
from
affected
country
Date of receipt
of information
Observation
started from
Today's
Health
status
Comments
12
ANNEXURE 5
FORMAT FOR DAILY REPORTING OF HEALTH STATUS OF PASSENGERS ARRIVING FROM 2019-nCoV
AFFECTED COUNTRY.
Date:……………………
Time:…………………..
S.
No.
State New
passengers
enrolled for
observation
Cumulative
number of
Passengers
under
observation
No. of
passengers
who have
completed
28 days
observation
period
Number of
passengers
found
symptomatic
& referred
Comments
1 A&N Island
2 Andhra Pradesh
3 Arunachal Pradesh
4 Assam
5 Bihar
6 Chandigarh
7 Chhattisgarh
8 D N Haveli
9 Daman & Diu
10 Delhi
11 Goa
12 Gujarat
13 Haryana
14 Himachal Pradesh
15 Jammu & Kashmir
16 Jharkhand
17 Karnataka
18 Kerala
19 Lakshadweep
20 Madhya Pradesh
21 Maharashtra
22 Manipur
23 Meghalaya
24 Mizoram
25 Nagaland
26 Odisha
27 Puducherry
28 Punjab
29 Rajasthan
30 Sikkim
31 Tamil Nadu
13
32 Telangana
33 Tripura
34 Uttar Pradesh
35 Uttarakhand
36 West Bengal
TOTAL
14
ANNEXURE 6
Suspect Case Referral Form: For any passenger developing symptom as per case definition
of 2019-nCoV, requisite information will be shared to NCDC/CSU/SSU immediately
Full Name:
Age in years:
Gender:
Passport number:
Complete Address
(For Indian passport holders)
Place of Stay during visit (For
International tourists)
Landline number with STD code (In
India)
Mobile number (In India)
Countries visited in last 28 days
Date of departure from 2019-nCoV
affected country
Passenger Clinical History:
Travel History after arrival in India:
Name & Contact details of the Hospital where currently admitted:
