Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Testing for coronavirus: privacy information – quick
read
Updated 1 May 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing: privacy information
Department
of Health &
Social Care
Contents
Introduction
Data controller
What personal data we collect
Care home testing
What purposes your data will be used for
Data processors and other recipients of your data
Data retention
Introduction
The government is rolling out a coronavirus testing programme, and you have chosen to book a home test or a test at a
regional test site, because you have either been:
invited by your employer to undertake a test
self-registered for a test, as a keyworker
identified as a care home resident or you reside in a similar property, or work in a care home
a keyworker whose role means you cannot work from home
identified as a person aged 65 or older, and live in a household where someone is showing signs of coronavirus
The test will confirm whether you currently have coronavirus. You will be sent a text message and/or email message with
your test result.
The result of the test will enable you or other members in your household to know what action to take, for example,
possibly returning to work, depending on your result.
The test is completely voluntary. You do not have to register for, or take, a test. You can cancel the test that you have
booked but are encouraged to take it.
If you do take the test, please follow the instructions when you register for a test. The different tests have different
instructions.
Data controller
This testing programme has been commissioned by the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), and they decide
what information is required and how it needs to be used.
DHSC are working together with the Scottish, Northern Irish and Welsh governments, who may have their own testing
processes specific to their area, along with country-specific information relating to coronavirus.
What personal data we collect
You need to submit your details on the website to register to be tested for coronavirus and to receive a home testing kit or
an invite to attend at an allotted regional test site.
If you cannot book a test online, you can book a test by calling 0300 303 2713.
Each test option will require slightly different details. The details we may need from you are:
first and last name
date of birth
sex
mobile phone number
email address
postcode
vehicle registration number – if booking a test at a regional test site
National Insurance (NINO) number – if you are a key worker
For the home test option, you will need to follow the instructions provided with the testing kit, as different test suppliers
may have different instructions.
At a regional test site, you need to follow the instructions given to you, both on registering and then on arrival at the site.
Your testing kit will be allocated a unique reference number and we will keep a record of the date and time your test was
taken. This is important for the laboratory to know. We will link your test’s unique reference number with your test
Data storage
Legal basis under GDPR and DPA 2018
Your rights as a data subject
Data Protection Officer
Residents in Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland
registration record, which consists of the information listed above.
After your coronavirus test, we will also collect and process your test results (this is health data which is special category
data under the GDPR), so we can inform you of your result, and what steps you need to take next.
Care home testing
Testing has been rolled out to care homes, and other similar residences, such as residential homes and hospices with
associated community services, for example, Hospice at Home. This also includes children’s homes run by local
authorities.
If you are resident in a care home, you will be tested where you live. The manager of the home can register you for a test.
The test may be done either by a mobile testing unit that visits the home, or by conducting a home test with a home testing
kit. Once the sample has been taken, it will be collected by courier and sent for analysis.
Your result will be sent to the manager of the home, so they can inform you of the result and next steps that need to be
taken. For example, being moved to reduce the risk of spreading the infection. This is only for test results for COVID19 –
all other test results will be treated in the normal way.
If you have a Power of Attorney who is legally responsible for you, the result will also be shared with them. For English
residents, your test result will also be sent to your GP to update your medical records.
For staff who work in this area, you will also be eligible for testing. This could be done either by a mobile testing unit (if
they visit on a day you work), if the manager of the home requests a test kit for you (the manager may register staff
individually, but must input your contact number and email address), or you self-register.
Your result will be sent to you, along with information about next steps, and not to the manager of the home. We strongly
encourage you to share your result with your manager, but you do not have to.
If you live in England, your result will also be sent to your GP to update your medical records.
What purposes your data will be used for
DHSC are the data controller for the following purposes:
confirming your appointment
performing a security and ID verification at the test centre
receiving and processing your test
returning your results to you
undertaking quality assurance of the testing process – for example, clinical process assurance
analysis to support operational decisions to improve the full end-to-end testing process, such as:
day-to-day operational use – for example, whether someone attended their appointment
to inform test site process improvements – for example, manage test site capacity or throughput
to support logistics planning
Data processors and other recipients of your data
DHSC have appointed data processors to carry out the following activities:
registration, appointment scheduling and capture of information at the point of taking the test at a regional test site, or
booking a home test
verify your identity – this may include various organisations who run the regional test sites, or verification by your
employer (if you have booked a test as an employee). We may use an agency, who will check your identity (this is not a
credit check and does not affect your credit score)
overseeing the logistics of test kit deliveries
transporting and delivering kits
link your personal details, provided on registering for the test, to the test result
forward your test results, email address, and phone number to NHS Business Services Authority (NHSBSA) to send
you your test results. This does not apply to Welsh residents – further information on how they get their is available
receive data to enable your results to be communicated back to you by text message and email, along with supporting
information
For English residents, we will link your test result to your GP record, so you do not need to inform your GP of your result.
If you are resident in Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland, there iscountry-specific information.
Data retention
We will retain your personal data for up to 8 years, in accordance with theRecords Management Code of Practice for
Health and Social Care 2016, but will dispose of your data sooner if it is appropriate to do so.
If you live in Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland, there iscountry-specific information on retention of records.
Data storage
Your data will be stored and processed in the UK. Fully anonymous data such as statistical data (which does not allow you
to be identified) may be stored and processed outside of the UK.
Legal basis under GDPR and DPA 2018
DHSC’s legal basis for processing your personal data is:
GDPR Article 6(1)(e) – the processing is necessary for the performance of its official tasks carried out in the public
interest in providing and managing a health service
GDPR Article 9(2)(h) – the processing is necessary for medical diagnosis, the provision of health treatment and
management of a health and social care system
DPA 2018 – Schedule 1, Part 1, (2) (2) (f) – Health or social care purposes
Your rights as a data subject
Your rights as a data subject are unaffected by this programme. You can contact any organisation involved in handling
your personal data to find out more about how they use it.
If you have a complaint about how your information is being used, you should contact the specific organisation in the first
instance. If this is unsuccessful, you can also raise a complaint with the Information Commissioner’s Office.
Data Protection Officer
DHSC’s Data Protection Officer is John Ryder.
Email: data.protection@dhsc.gov.uk
For more detailed information about the testing programme, or for details of who is processing data on behalf of DHSC,
you can read the privacy information in full.
Residents in Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland
If you live in Wales, Northern Ireland or Scotland, you can get information specific to your country about how your
government will use your information:
Wales
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
The UK has left the EU
Transition period: get ready for 2021
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
