Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for the public on the mental health and
wellbeing aspects of coronavirus (COVID-19)
Updated 31 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for the public on mental health and wellbeing
Public Health
England
Contents
What you need to know
Background
What can help your mental health and wellbeing
Staying at home
Where to get further support
Additional advice for groups with specific mental health needs
People with a learning disability
Autistic people
What you need to know
The coronavirus (COVID19) outbreak is going to have an impact on everyone’s daily lives, as the government and the
NHS take necessary steps to manage the outbreak, reduce transmission and treat those who need medical attention.
It may be difficult, but by following guidance onsocial distancing, or staying at home, you are helping to protect yourself,
your family, the NHS and your community.
During this time, you may be bored, frustrated or lonely. You may also feel low, worried, anxious, or be concerned about
your health or that of those close to you. Everyone reacts differently to events and changes in the way that we think, feel
and behave vary between different people and over time. It’s important that you take care of your mind as well as your
body and to get further support if you need it.
Background
This guide provides advice on how to look after your mental health and wellbeing during the coronavirus (COVID-19)
outbreak.
Guidance on supporting children and young people’s mental health and wellbeing is also available.
For wider guidance on how to protect yourself and others, and actions to take if you think you may have contracted the
virus please see the guidance on this page.
This guidance will be updated in line with the changing situation.
What can help your mental health and wellbeing
Consider how to connect with others:Maintaining relationships with people you trust is important for your mental
wellbeing. Think about how you can stay in touch with friends and family via telephone, video calls or social media instead
of meeting in person – whether it’s people you normally see often or connecting with old friends.
Help and support others: Think about how you could help those around you – it could make a big difference to them and
can make you feel better too. Could you message a friend or family member nearby? Are there community groups that you
could join to support others locally? Remember it’s important to do this in line with guidance on coronavirus (COVID-19) to
keep yourself and everyone safe. And try to be accepting of other people’s concerns, worries or behaviours.
Talk about your worries: It is quite common to feel worried, scared or helpless about the current situation. Remember
that this is a difficult time for everyone and sharing how you are feeling and the things you are doing to cope with family
and friends can help them too. If you don’t feel able to do that, there are people you can speak to via NHS recommended
helplines or you could find support groups online to connect with.
Look after your physical wellbeing: Your physical health has a big impact on how you are feeling emotionally and
mentally. At times like these, it can be easy to fall into unhealthy patterns of behaviour which in turn can make you feel
worse. Try to eat healthy, well-balanced meals, drink enough water, exercise inside where possible and outside once a
day, and try to avoid smoking, alcohol and drugs.
If you are able to go outside, consider walking or gardening (keeping the recommended 2 metres from others as outlined
in the social distancing guidance). If you are staying at home, you can find free easy10 minute work outs from Public
Health England or other exercise videos to try at home on the NHS Fitness Studio. Sport England also has good tips for
keeping active at home.
Look after your sleep: Feeling anxious or worried can make it harder to get a good night’s sleep. Good-quality sleep
makes a big difference to how you feel mentally and physically, so it’s important to get enough.
Try to maintain regular sleeping patterns and keep good sleep hygiene practices – like avoiding screens before bed,
cutting back on caffeine and creating a restful environment. The Every Mind Matters sleep page provides practical advice
on how to improve your sleep.
Try to manage difficult feelings: Many people find the news about coronavirus (COVID-19) concerning. However, some
people may experience such intense anxiety that it becomes a problem. Try to focus on the things you can control,
including where you get information from and actions to make yourself feel better prepared.
It is okay to acknowledge some things that are outside of your control right now but constant repetitive thoughts about the
Older people
People living with dementia
Dealing with a mental health crisis or emergency
situation which lead you to feel anxious or overwhelmed are not helpful. The Every Mind Matters page on anxiety and
NHS mental wellbeing audio guides provide further information on how to manage anxiety.
Manage your media and information intake: 24-hour news and constant social media updates can make you more
worried. If it is affecting you, try to limit the time you spend watching, reading, or listening to media coverage of the
outbreak. It may help to only check the news at set times or limiting to a couple of checks a day.
Get the facts: Gather high-quality information that will help you to accurately determine your own or other people’s risk of
contracting coronavirus (COVID-19) so that you can take reasonable precautions. Find a credible source you can trust
such as GOV.UK, or theNHS website, and fact check information that you get from newsfeeds, social media or from other
people.
Think about how possibly inaccurate information could affect others too. Try not to share information without fact-checking
against credible sources.
Think about your new daily routine: Life is changing for us all for a while. Whether you are staying at home or social
distancing, you are likely to see some disruption to your normal routine.
Think about how you can adapt and create positive new routines – try to engage in useful activities (such as cleaning,
cooking or exercise) or meaningful activities (such as reading or calling a friend). You might find it helpful to write a plan
for your day or your week.
Do things you enjoy: When you are anxious, lonely or low you may do things that you usually enjoy less often, or not at
all. Focussing on your favourite hobby, learning something new or simply taking time to relax indoors should give you
some relief from anxious thoughts and feelings and can boost your mood.
If you can’t do the things you normally enjoy because you are staying at home, try to think about how you could adapt
them, or try something new. There are lots of free tutorials and courses online and people are coming up with innovative
online solutions like online pub quizzes and streamed live music concerts.
Set goals: Setting goals and achieving them gives a sense of control and purpose – think about things you want or need
to do that you can still do at home. It could be watching a film, reading a book or learning something online.
Keep your mind active: Read, write, play games, do crossword puzzles, sudokus, jigsaws or drawing and painting. Find
something that works for you.
Take time to relax and focus on the present:This can help with difficult emotions, worries about the future, and can
improve wellbeing. Relaxation techniques can also help some people to deal with feelings of anxiety. For useful resources
see Every Mind Matters and NHS’ mindfulness page.
If you can, once a day get outside, or bring nature in:Spending time in green spaces can benefit both your mental and
physical wellbeing. If you can’t get outside much you can try to still get these positive effects by spending time with the
windows open to let in fresh air, arranging space to sit and see a nice view (if possible) and get some natural sunlight, or
get out into the garden if you can.
Remember that social distancing guidelines enable you to go outside to exercise once a day as long as you keep 2 metres
apart from others who are not members of your household group.
Staying at home
Recent guidance is clear about the need for people tostay at home. If you are feeling anxious it might help to think about
potential challenges and make a plan for them.
Practical issues
Supplies: Think about how you can get any supplies you need – either from a neighbour, family friends or a delivery
service so you don’t worry about running out. Try to pick healthy food, especially as you might not get as much exercise
as normal.
Financial concerns: You may be worried about work and money if you have to stay home – these issues can have a big
impact on your mental health. For guidance on what your rights are at work, what benefits you are entitled and what
further support is available please see our guidance for employees or advice fromcitizens advice or the National Debt line.
If you care for other people:You may be worried about how to ensure care for those who rely on you – either your
dependants at home or others that you regularly visit. Let your local authority know if you provide care, or support
someone you don’t live with. Further advice on creating a contingency plan is available from Carers UK.
If you are being treated or taking medication for existing conditions
Continue accessing treatment and support where possible:Let relevant services know that you are staying at home,
and work out how to continue receiving support during this time:
ask about having appointments by phone, text or online. For example, this could be with your counsellor, therapist or
support worker, nurse, care worker or befriender
if you use care services that will be affected by staying at home, you should let yourlocal authority and care provider
know so alternative arrangements can be put in place
make it clear if any support is still needed. Tell them that alternative arrangements are required if any of the usual
support can’t continue. This may include things like carers visiting, day centre sessions, or friends and family coming
over to help
Keep taking your medication: You might be able to order repeat prescriptions by phone, or online using an app or
website if your doctor’s surgery offers this.
ask your pharmacy about getting your medication delivered or think about who you could ask to collect it for you. The
NHS website has more information about getting prescriptions for someone else and checking if you have to pay for
prescriptions
continue to order your repeat prescriptions in your usual timeframe. There is no need to order for a longer duration or
larger quantities
your GP practice (or clinical team) may move your prescriptions to repeat dispensing arrangements so you only have to
contact your pharmacy to get a repeat of your medicine rather than your practice
be careful about buying medication online. You should only buy from registered pharmacies. You can check if a
pharmacy is registered on the General Pharmaceutical Council website
you can contact NHS 111 in England if you’re worried about accessing medication
Where to get further support
Managing physical symptoms that are triggered by stress and anxiety
It is quite common to experience short-lived physical symptoms when your mood is low or anxious, for example:
faster, irregular or more noticeable heartbeat
feeling lightheaded and dizzy
headaches
chest pains or loss of appetite
It can be difficult to know what is causing these symptoms, but often people who experience them due to stress, anxiety or
low mood find that they get worse when they focus on them. See advice from the NHS on managing the physical
symptoms.
If you are concerned about your physical symptoms, then do contactNHS 111 online.
For advice on coronavirus (COVID-19) and any symptoms see theNHS website.
If you are experiencing stress, feelings of anxiety or low mood, you can use theNHS mental health and wellbeing advice
website for self-assessment, audio guides and practical toolsEvery Mind Matters also provides simple tips and advice to
start taking better care of your mental health. If you are still struggling after several weeks and it is affecting your daily life,
please contact NHS 111 online. If you have no internet access, you should call NHS 111.
In a medical emergencycall 999. This is when someone is seriously ill or injured and their life is at risk. A mental health
emergency should be taken as seriously as a physical health emergency.
Additional advice for groups with specific mental health needs
Existing mental health problems
If you already have a mental health problem, then you may be finding the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak particularly
challenging. The advice above should help, but here are a few extra things that you may want to think about. This advice
is part of comprehensive guidance provided by Mind.
Managing difficult feelings or behaviours to do with hygiene, washing or fears of infection
Some mental health problems can cause difficult feelings or behaviours to do with washing or hygiene. If you experience
this, you might find it hard to hear advice about washing your hands.
It is important to follow government advice on helping to avoid the spread of coronavirus (COVID-19), but if you find you
are going beyond the recommendations, if this is making you feel stressed or anxious, or if you are having intrusive
thoughts here are some things you could try:
don’t keep re-reading the same advice if this is unhelpful for you
let other people know you’re struggling, for example, you could ask them not to discuss the news with you
breathing exercises can help you cope and feel more in control. You can find asimple breathing exercise on the NHS
website and Mind’s pages on relaxation have some relaxation tips and exercises you can try
set limits, like washing your hands for the recommended 20 seconds
plan something to do after washing your hands, which could help distract you and change your focus
it could also help to read some of Mind’s tips in their information on
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
Speaking to your mental health team
If you are already receiving mental health care, contact your mental health team to discuss how care will continue, and to
update safety/care plans.
Managing panic and anxiety
If you have panic attacks or flashbacks, it might help to plan a ‘safe space’ in your home that you’ll go to.
You can also find ways to comfort yourself if you’re feeling anxious. For example, Mind hasgames and puzzles you can
use to distract yourself, and breathing exercises which may help.
Managing feelings of being trapped or claustrophobia
You are probably spending more time than usual at home so try to get outside if you can, once a day. You could also open
the windows to let in fresh air, find a place to sit with a view outside, or sit on your doorstep or in your garden if you have
one. It can also help to regularly change the rooms you spend time in (if possible). This can help to give you a sense of
space.
If you are reducing your drinking significantly
If you are reducing your drinking, remember it can be dangerous to stop too quickly without proper support. If you have
physical withdrawal symptoms (like shaking, sweating or feeling anxious until you have your first drink of the day) you
should seek medical advice. For further advice available in your area (including remote services) see NHS advice.
People with a learning disability
You may be finding the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak stressful. You may be worried about changes that might happen
because of it, including having to stay at home. You may also be worried about your family or those close to you.
Public Health England has easy read guidance on coronavirus (COVID-19) and how it may affect you. There is also other
information available about coronavirus (COVID-19) from Mencap and how to manage difficult feelings you are having.
There are ways you can take care of yourself and prevent spreading the virus:
as you are asked to now stay at home you should keep in touch with people you trust (like friends, family and
employer) over the phone or internet - follow the advice from the stay at home and social distancing guidance
there may also be self-advocacy groups in your area offering more support online or by phone - you can ask your
families or carers for help to search for these groups
it is also important to get information about coronavirus (COVID-19) only from places you can trust, such as the
NHS
website
While it is important to be aware of coronavirus (COVID-19), it is important not to forget about any other health conditions
you might have. Make sure you take any medication you have been prescribed, keep any hospital appointments you have
(unless you have been told otherwise by the hospital) and tell people if you can’t attend appointments.
Autistic people
You may be finding the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak stressful and be worried about getting the virus or changes that
might happen because of it, including having to stay at home. There are ways you can take care of yourself and prevent
spreading the virus:
Understand what is happening
Keep up to date with information about Coronavirus (COVID-19) from sources you can trust, such as the
NHS website.
Help to stop the virus from spreading
There are 4 easy steps you can take to reduce the risk of getting coronavirus or spreading it to others:
wash hands regularly for at least 20 seconds with soap and water
use a tissue for coughs and sneezes and bin it
avoid touching your face, including your mouth and eyes
get up to date information about staying at home or what to do if you feel unwell on the
NHS 111 website. If you are
unsure about your symptoms speak to someone you trust about them, like a support worker
Plan to keep mentally well
Do the things you would usually do to keep well, like eating food you enjoy and taking exercise, once a day outside if you
can. If you have support from others, plan with them how you can remain well and relaxed. There are also other things you
can do to help to manage your emotions if you feel you are losing control, such as:
keeping a diary
using apps like Brain in Hand
learning relaxation techniques
creating a plan with your carer for when you feeling anxiety
You know what strategies have helped in the past, so use them again now. TheNational Autistic Society guidance on
managing anxiety might also be helpful.
Get help if you are struggling
Hearing about coronavirus (COVID-19), and the changes it causes in your daily life, might make you feel like you don’t
have control, or make you worried or scared about your health. These feelings are common. Try to speak to someone you
trust such as a friend, family member or supporter.
If you do become unwell and need medical treatment, share your hospital passport or autism diagnosis so staff know the
best way to support you.
If you are still feeling worried and want more help. You can call theAutism Helpline on 0808 800 4104.
Older people
Government guidance is that older people are at increased risk of severe illness and need to be particularly stringent in
following social distancing measures and staying at home. Given this, it is natural for older people, particularly those with
pre-existing medical conditions, to feel concerned or affected by changes you have to make to your daily life. The following
suggestions may help with any difficult feelings and look after your mental health:
Stay connected
Draw on support you might have through your friends, family and other networks. Try to stay in touch with those around
you, this might be over the phone, by post, or online. If you have been advised to stay at home, let people know how you
would like to stay in touch and build that into your routine.
Get practical help
If you need help, for example with shopping or running errands, ask for it and let those around you know what they can do.
If you need help but you’re not sure who to contact, Age UK runs an advice line(0800 678 1602 – lines are open every
day, 8am to 7pm) that can put you in touch with local services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
People living with dementia
You may feel concerned about coronavirus how it could affect you. Alzheimer’s Society has publishedinformation on
coronavirus for people affected by dementia.
If you’d like to connect and talk with other people affected by dementia, you can visit the Alzheimer’s Society online
community Talking Point.
A range of information on information on dementia is also available fromAlzheimer’s Research UK.
If you are still feeling worried and want more help you can call theAlzheimer’s Society Helpline on 0300 222 11 22.
You can also speak to a dementia specialist Admiral Nurse onDementia UK’s Helpline, on 0800 888 6687.
Dealing with a mental health crisis or emergency
You may find that the added stress of the current situation could have a big impact on your mental health. In some cases,
you may feel that you are having a mental health crisis as you no longer feel able to cope or be in control of your situation.
You may: feel great emotional distress or anxiety, feel that you cannot cope with day-to-day life or work, think about self-
harm or even suicide, or experience or hear voices (hallucinations).
If this sort of situation happens, you should get immediate expert assessment and advice to identify the best course of
action:
if you have already been given a Crisis Line number from a health professional, please call it
if you’re under the care of a mental health team and have a specific care plan that states who to contact when you need
urgent care, follow this plan
Mind also provides information about how toplan for a crisis
Samaritans has a free to call service 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, if you want to talk to someone in confidence. Call
them on 116 123
find local crisis support services near you that can support you
you can contact NHS 111 if you need urgent care but it’s not life-threatening
in a medical emergency, call 999 if you are seriously ill or injured and your life is at risk. A mental health emergency
should be taken as seriously as a physical health emergency
See further advice from the NHS ondealing with a mental health crisis.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
