Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Considerations for acute personal protective
equipment (PPE) shortages
Updated 17 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: infection prevention and control (IPC)
Public Health
England
This document aligns with current evidence and Centers for Disease Control (
CDC) 1 and World Health Organization
Contents
1. Purpose and scope of this document
2. Medical masks
3. Gowns and coveralls
4. Eye Protection
5. Gloves
6. Aprons
(WHO) 2 guidance on optimising the supply of personal protective equipment (
PPE) and the use ofPPE when in short
supply.
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) has reviewed the options outlined in this document. Where there are acute
shortages of PPE, and where it is safe to do so, it approves the sessional and reuse ofPPE.
Some of the PPE in the NHS COVID-19 Ensemble is designated by the manufacturers as being single use. However, the
HSE recognises that some compromise is needed to optimise the supply ofPPE in times of extreme shortages. It has
agreed that the use as outlined in this document is appropriate within health and safety legislation and provides
appropriate protection for health and care workers.
These are exceptional circumstances and do not reflectHSE’s standard approach. HSE expects Trusts to have an agreed
action plan to support implementation which includes a consideration of all measures to manage usage effectively.
In addition, documentation of how any re-use will be managed (recognising that somePPE is personal, for example
FFP3/FFP2 respirators) and should include a record of systems of work to manage how integrity checks and
decontamination processes are being carried out. It should also recognise that certain equipment (for example gloves and
aprons) cannot be reused.
Organisations should ensure healthcare workers are appropriately hydrated during prolonged use and trained to recognise
dehydration, fatigue and exhaustion while wearing PPE.
Further work on validating methods to safely reprocess masks and fluid repellent gowns is under way and future updates
will be circulated when available.
1. Purpose and scope of this document
This document aims to highlight the sessional use and reuse ofPPE when there are severe shortages of supply.
The considerations are to ensure that health and care workers are appropriately protected from COVID-19, where items of
PPE are unavailable, and should be considered as temporary measures until the global supply chain is adequate to meet
the UK’s needs.
The reuse of PPE should be implemented until confirmation of adequate re-supply is in place.
These take into account the following important principles that should already be in place for all health and care delivery:
1. Only urgent or emergency face-to-face contacts in the health and social care setting.
2. Where an individual has a multi-drug resistant or other key pathogen, transmission-based infection prevention control
precautions should apply to prevent cross transmission to other individuals.
Sessional use: by one health or care worker during one shift while working. Clinical areas should include all ward areas.
In hospitals, leaving a ward area to continue to care or transfer a patient, the same PPE can be worn. Face
masks/respirators, gowns/ coveralls and eye protection should only be changed when taking a break or when visibly
contaminated or damaged.
Reuse: using the same item again, with appropriate precautions, by the same healthcare worker.
Alternatives to standard PPE: recommended where there is a crisis or short supply.
2. Medical masks
2.1 Fluid repellent surgical face masks (FRSM) and disposable respirators (FFP3/ FFP2/ N95)
This excludes re-usable respirators, that can be re-used according to manufacturer’s instructions.
FFP3/FFP2/N95 respirators have a large capacity for the filtration and retention of airborne contaminants. Sessional use
or re-use over the course of a day in health or social care, would not approach anywhere near that capacity.
Sessional use
The use of masks for one HCW to use in one work area. This is currently recommended in the UK Infection Prevention
and Control guidance.
it should be disposed of if it becomes moist, damaged, visibly soiled
the duration (number of hours) of sessional use is dependent on local (for example, heat, activity length, shift-length)
and individual factors. In practice, this may vary from 2 to 6 hours
if masks are touched or adjusted, hand hygiene should be performed immediately
if the mask is removed for any reason (for example, upon exiting the ward area, taking a break or completing a shift),
they are disposed of as clinical waste, unless they can be safely reused as outlined below
Resuse
Important requirements are as follows:
the mask should be removed and discarded if soiled, damaged, or hard to breathe through
masks with elastic ear hooks should be re-used (tie-on face masks are less suitable because they are more difficult to
remove)
hand hygiene should be performed before removing the face mask
face masks should be carefully folded so the outer surface is held inward and against itself to reduce likely contact with
the outer surface during storage
the folded mask should be stored between uses in a clean sealable bag/ box which is marked with the person’s name
and is then properly stored in a well-defined place
hand hygiene should be performed after removing the face mask
some models of PPE cannot be physically reused as they deform once being donned and do not go back to original
condition (meaning it would be difficult to re-don and achieve a fit check). Fit checks should be performed each time a
respirator is donned if it is reused
Alternatives to standard PPE
There is insufficient evidence to consider homemade masks or cloth masks in health and care settings.
3. Gowns and coveralls
Fluid repellent hospital gowns or coveralls are indicated for use for the care of patients in high risk areas, where aerosol
generating procedures (AGPs) are being performed.
There are 3 main options that can be considered as alternatives if gowns are not available:
1. Reserve disposable, fluid repellent gown or coveralls forAGPs and surgical procedures.
2. Disposable, non-fluid repellent gowns or coveralls with a disposable plastic apron for high-risk settings andAGPs with
forearm washing once gown or coverall is removed.
3. Reusable (washable) surgical gowns or coveralls or similar suitable clothing (for example, long-sleeved laboratory coat,
long-sleeved patient gown or industrial coverall) with a disposable plastic apron for AGPs and high-risk settings with
forearm washing once gown or coverall is removed. These would need to be washed in a hospital laundry and capacity
for hospital laundries may need to be increased.
3.1 Sessional use
This is the use of gowns or coveralls for healthcare workers (
HCWs) to use for higher risk clinical areas. This is currently
recommended in the UK Infection Prevention and Control guidance.
If the gown or coverall becomes visibly soiled, it must be disposed as infectious waste (followed by hand hygiene, donning
of a new gown, and appropriate donning of new gloves).
The following important factors would safely reduce gown usage over a session but organisations should develop an
implementation and action plan suitable to their organisation:
1. Label all higher risk area bays, single rooms, corridors, treatment rooms and nurses’ stations as ‘clinical’ areas within a
specific hospital area. Limit ‘non-clinical’ areas to staff kitchen/rest areas and changing room.
2. Once gown or coverall is donned, the gown/coverall should remain on the staff member until their next break. Plastic
aprons and gloves should be changed between patients (with the notes from aprons highlighted below).
3. Staff should doff the gown or coverall only when going from the clinical to non-clinical area of the ward, or if they are
leaving the ward for a break.
4. If leaving a higher risk area/theatre ward with a patient to transfer them to another area staff should retain their gown or
coverall and other PPE.
5. Teams that assist with turning and moving patients (“proning teams”), allied health professionals and other teams
should retain gowns or coveralls on sessional basis, changing gloves/aprons between patients/residents and
performing hand hygiene.
3.2 Reuse
Consider shifting disposable gowns or coveralls to reusable options, retaining disposable gowns only for high risk
AGPs.
If there are no available disposable gowns or coveralls, consider the use of gown alternatives including:
reusable gowns
reusable (washable) laboratory coats
reusable (washable) long sleeved patient gowns
reusable coveralls
Capacity for hospital laundering service should be considered if using these items.
4. Eye Protection
4.1 Goggles
Goggles provide barrier protection for the eyes. They should fit snuggly over and around the eyes or personal prescription
lenses, be indirectly-vented (to prevent penetration of splashes or sprays) and have an anti-fog coating to help maintain
clarity of vision. The lens is made of plastic, commonly polycarbonate and there is an adjustable elastic strap to allow snug
fit around the eyes. Goggles used for healthcare applications are typically reusable.
4.2 Visors
Visors provide barrier protection to the facial area and related mucous membranes (eyes, nose, lips) and are considered
an alternative to goggles. Visors should be used if AGP aerosol-generating procedure is performed. They should cover the
forehead, extend below the chin, and wrap around the side of the face. Visors are available in both disposable and
reusable options.
Sessional use
This is currently recommended in the UKInfection Prevention and Control guidance.
The goggles or face shield should be removed upon exiting the ward area per standard practice.
Reuse
This is currently recommended in the UKInfection Prevention and Control guidance, where the eye protection is not
relabelled as single use only.
If in extremely short supply, single use only items could be re-used in a similar way as re-usable items.
The standard method of cleaning is to use a detergent product either combined/ sequentially with a decontamination
product as agreed by the local infection prevention and control (IPC) specialists.
They should be rinsed thoroughly to remove any residual detergent or cleaning product and left to dry.
Products will degrade over time with repeated cleaning, particular the anti-fog component and will need to be resupplied
regularly.
5. Gloves
This guidance relates to examination gloves used for clinical care of COVID-19 patients. These gloves are available in a
variety of materials, are single use and must be disposed of after each use. Non-powdered, nitrile gloves are the most
commonly recommended for healthcare.
5.1 Additional considerations
Do not use double gloves for care of suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patients.
Sessional use or of reuse examination gloves for clinical care should be avoided.
6. Aprons
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
These are indicated for use when there is risk of splashes or sprays to protect clothes, where gowns are used on a
sessional basis or where the gowns are not fluid resistant.
Re-use of aprons is not recommended.
1. CDC strategies for US-healthcare settings on COVID-19: Strategies for Optimizing the Supply ofPPE ↩
2. WHO’s guidance on the Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease 2019↩
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
