SPOTLIGHT
• Zero deaths reported today.
• All 18 new cases reported today were detected in migrants
entering the country and held in quarantine at the
immigration detention centre in Songkhla’s Sadao border
district.
• At present, these cases have no or mild symptoms.
Confirmatory laboratory tests for these cases will be
undertaken
in Bangkok.
• To date, 84 confirmed cases were detected in people who
were held in state/local quarantine across the country;
another 60 confirmed cases were detected in immigrants
who were held in the immigration detention centre in
Songkhla.
• During the last 28 days, 74 confirmed cases were reported in
Yala (54 of which were in Bunnungsata District alone). Prior to
this period, 52 were reported in the province
UPDATES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH
Testing
• Data from 121 of the total 142 COVID-19 RT-PCR laboratories (both public and private) as of 1st
May
show that a total of 227,860 samples have been tested for COVID-19.The trend during April shows that
the number of tests has been increasing but the percentage of positive cases has been decreasing.
• The overall positive rate among PUI (persons under investigation) is also reduced (mid-January to 6
April = 4.5%). From 7 April (when the definition of PUI changed) to 30 Apr the rate is 1.9%.
• The ministry’s policy is to increase testing among at-risk/vulnerable groups in the community.
Migrant population
• While active case finding is being intensified in the South, the Department of Disease Control (DDC)
is expanding its efforts to other crowded settings, such as prisons and migrant camps. Active case
finding among these groups to date has found no confirmed cases.
On 1st
May, DDC launched the COVID-19 hotline (#1422) using Khmer, Myanmar and Lao languages.
• 73 calls were received on the first day of operation. Questions included: the general COVID-19 situation;
the Emergency Decree and information about border crossing; testing for COVID-19 while
jobless/without income; preventive behaviours; and influenza vaccination.
193
Hospitalized
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND
SITUATION
IN THE PAST
24 HOURS
54
Deaths
(0 new)
103
Health care
staff cases
2,740
Recovered
Confirmed
(18 new)
2,987
4 May 2020 WHO Thailand Situation Report
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
Influenza vaccination and COVID-19
Vaccination is the most effective way to prevent infection and reduce hospitalisations and deaths caused by
influenza viruses. The Ministry of Public Health and WHO recommend yearly influenza vaccination for
pregnant women (as the highest priority), as well as for children, elderly people, those with underlying chronic
medical conditions (including immunosuppression and thalassaemia) and health-care workers. The Ministry of
Public Health also supports vaccination for individuals with obesity
Influenza vaccine is not effective against the COVID-19 virus. However, preventing excess burden on the
health system by reducing influenza in the population means that the system has more capacity to manage
COVID-19. In addition, because COVID-19 and influenza have a similar disease presentation, it may also
help your doctor to make an accurate diagnosis if they know you have been vaccinated against influenza.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand is in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health
to support migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the
UNUN.system in Thailand.
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English, please visit.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit.
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO, please visit.
USEFUL
LINKS
World Health Organization Country Office for Thailand
4th Fl., Permanent Secretary Bldg.3 Ministry of Public Health,
Nonthaburi Thailand, 11000
Media queries sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
WHOThailand
WHOThailand
@WHOThailand
www.who.int/thailand
For latest updates and resources, please visit:
