Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Advertising traffic regulation orders during
coronavirus (COVID-19)
Published 21 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Traffic orders: advertising during coronavirus (COVID-19)
Department
for Transport
This guidance on traffic regulation orders (
TRO) applies to England. It has been produced in response to concerns about
the ability of traffic authorities to implement the publicity requirements when making permanent or temporary TROs during
the current crisis. Its purpose is to mitigate the impact on the public and assist authorities in considering other means to
inform them. It is temporary guidance and will be withdrawn once conditions allow.
Contents
Advertising where local newspapers have moved to online publication only
Advertising orders where the local newspaper has closed
Posting notices of the order on the affected roads
Making deposited documents available for public inspection at council offices
The relevant legislation is:
regulations 7, 17 and schedule 2 to the ‘
Local authorities’ traffic orders (procedure) (England and Wales) regulations
1996 (the 1996 regulations) as amended for permanent orders
regulation 3 and the schedule to the ‘Road traffic (temporary restrictions) procedure regulations 1992 (the 1992
regulations), as amended for temporary orders
In making a TRO, authorities must follow the regulations. It is understood that owing to the impact of COVID-19,
compliance with some of the publicity provisions in the regulations will be problematic for some authorities. In deciding
whether to make a TRO, authorities should give consideration to their ability to comply with the procedural requirements of
the regulations. If an authority considers that it must proceed with a TRO but it is unable to comply with some of the
publicity provisions, it should endeavour to use other means to ensure that individuals likely to be affected by TROs are
informed of the orders, pursuant to the legislation.
The main issues appear to be:
1. advertising where local newspapers have moved to online publication only
2. advertising orders where the local newspaper has closed
3. posting notices of the order on the affected roads
4. making deposited documents available for public inspection at council offices
Advertising where local newspapers have moved to online publication only
Regulation 7(1)(a) of the 1996 regulations states that an order-making authority shall, before making an order:
(a) publish, at least once, a notice (in these regulations called a “notice of proposals”) containing the particulars
specified in parts I and II of schedule 1 in a newspaper circulating in the area in which any road or other place to which
the order relates is situated
Regulation 17(a) states that once an order has been made, an order-making authority shall within 14 days:
(a) publish in a newspaper circulating in the area in which any road or place to which the order relates is situated, a
notice (in these regulations called a “notice of making”)
Regulation 3 of the 1992 regulations states:
(2) not less than 7 days before making an order, the traffic authority shall publish notice of their intention to make the
order in one or more newspapers circulating in the area in which any road to which the order relates is situated
(5) within 14 days after making the order the traffic authority shall publish a notice of the making of the order in one or
more newspapers circulating in the area in which any road to which the order relates is situated
Where the local paper has moved to online publication only, an online newspaper that is circulated locally is likely to
satisfy the above requirements to an extent. However, online publicity alone may not provide the coverage required to
publicise TROs adequately. This is because a proportion of people do not have internet access. Additional efforts should
be made, therefore, to ensure people and organisations are adequately informed. This could include the use of other
media, for example, letter or leaflet drops, local radio, circulation of information via council mailing lists, publication on local
authority websites. This is not an exhaustive list.
Advertising orders where the local newspaper has closed
Where all local papers for the area have closed down, the authority should consider what steps it can take in mitigation to
ensure compliance with the intent of the legislation to inform members of the public through their local paper. The use of
other media should be considered.
Letter drops may be considered particularly effective at notifying those most likely to be affected as they can be targeted to
places of residence, as a local newspaper would be. If considered necessary, extending the circulation of letter drops
could mitigate for the loss of local papers. Ultimately, the authority should be able to demonstrate that it has taken
appropriate measures to ensure that the absence of a local paper does not disadvantage organisations and individuals.
Posting notices of the order on the affected roads
Regulation 7(1)(c) of the 1996 regulations states that an order making authority shall, before making an order:
c) take such other steps as it may consider appropriate for ensuring that adequate publicity about the order is given to
persons likely to be affected by its provisions and, without prejudice to the generality of this sub-paragraph, such other
steps may include -
(ii) the display of notices in roads or other places affected by the order; or
(iii) the delivery of notices or letters to premises, or premises occupied by persons, appearing to the authority to be
likely to be affected by any provision in the order
Regulation 17(4) states:
(4) the order making authority shall take such other steps of the kinds referred to in regulation 7(1)(c) as it considers
appropriate for the purpose of ensuring that adequate publicity is given to the making of the order
Part I and II of the schedule to the 1992 regulations states:
1 and 4: a notice shall be displayed in a prominent position at each end of the length of road to which the order relates
and at the points at which it will be necessary for vehicles or pedestrians to diverge from the road, stating the effect of
the order and, where applicable, the alternative route or routes available for traffic
2 and 5: each such notice shall be displayed throughout the period during which the order is in force and the traffic
authority shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the notices remain in a legible condition and continue to be so
displayed for so long as the order remains in force or are promptly replaced as often as occasion requires during that
period
Authorities are understandably concerned about the safety of staff posting on-site notices and we would expect them to
ensure they follow Public Health England’s guidance about social distancingand ensure that appropriate measures are
put in place for their employees.
Where an authority considers it necessary to advise staff not to post site notices, the regulations give some discretion for
permanent orders. An authority is required to “take such other steps as it may consider appropriate for ensuring that
adequate publicity … is given to persons likely to be affected”. In these circumstances, the authority should consider
effective alternative options for informing the public and use of other media as set out above.
For temporary orders, the site notices are discretionary, except where the notice relates to a footpath, bridleway, cycle
track or byway (see regulations 4 and 11 of the 1992 regulations). Where authorities consider complying with the
mandatory requirements would put their staff at risk, then they will need to consider the risk of non-compliance with the
regulations when taking the decision to make a temporary TRO, and weigh up the risk with the necessity to make the
order in the current circumstances.
Making deposited documents available for public inspection at council
offices
Schedule 2 to the 1996 regulations states:
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
1 …[relevant documents]…must be made available for inspection at the principal offices of the authority during normal
office hours and at such other places (if any) within its area as it may think fit during such hours as it may determine for
each such place
Public Health England’s advice on social distancing and avoiding non- essential trips has led to some authorities closing
their buildings to the public. Authorities should therefore consider alternative arrangements that could achieve the same
result. For example, posting a notice on the authority’s website or outside offices, or at any other relevant place to inform
the public of alternative arrangements. The notices could include a telephone number or email contact to request copies,
or details of the publication of the documents on its website.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
