Novel Coronavirus(2019-nCoV)
Situation Report – 20
Data as reported by 9 February 2020*

HIGHLIGHTS
•

No new countries reported cases of 2019-nCoV in the past 24 hours.

•

Update on Cruise Ship Diamond Princess:

On 9 February, Japanese National Health Authorities provided WHO with a
detailed update on the situation of the Cruise Ship Diamond Princess, currently
harboured in Yokohama, Japan. Following confirmation of a case of 2019-nCoV,
all crew and passengers are being quarantined for a 14-day period on board the
vessel, asked to stay in their cabins and to wear a mask when leaving their cabin.
All crew and passengers are closely followed-up and are medically examined and
tested for 2019-nCoV when displaying any signs or symptoms suggestive of 2019nCoV disease. The quarantine period will come to an end on 19 February.
Epidemiological and environmental investigations are ongoing.
As of 8 February, 64 individuals were found to have been infected with 2019-nCoV
among passengers and crew members. All individuals testing positive were
disembarked and admitted for medical care in infectious disease hospitals in the
Yokohama area. Close contacts of the infected passengers are asked to remain in
quarantine for 14 days from last contact with a confirmed case. Thus, the
quarantine period will be extended beyond the 19 February as appropriate only
for close contacts of newly confirmed cases.

SITUATION IN NUMBERS
total and new cases in last 24
hours

Globally
37 558 confirmed (2676 new)
China
37 251 confirmed (2657 new)
6188 severe (87 new)
812 deaths (89 new)
Outside of China
307 confirmed (19 new)
24 countries
1 death
WHO RISK ASSESSMENT
China
Regional Level
Global Level

Figure 1. Countries, territories or areas with reported confirmed cases of 2019-nCoV, 9 February 2020

*The situation report includes information provided by national authorities as of 10 AM Central European Time

Very High
High
High

TECHNICAL FOCUS: 2019-nCoV Training resources online on OpenWHO.org
Through the lessons of past emergencies, WHO has learned the value of offering learning materials quickly in an
outbreak that will provide critical information to fight disease and protect lives. These materials must be easily
accessible in the languages of frontline responders. The WHO has rapidly developed and delivered two online
trainings to support the response to the 2019-nCoV outbreak that are available on the open learning platform,
OpenWHO.org. The platform was established three years ago with emergencies such as 2019-nCoV in mind, in which
WHO would need to reach millions of people across the globe with real-time, accessible learning materials.
The courses currently available are:
1. Emerging respiratory viruses, including 2019-nCoV: methods for detection, prevention, response and
control: https://openwho.org/courses/introduction-to-ncov
This course provides a general introduction to 2019-nCoV and emerging respiratory viruses and is intended
for public health professionals, incident managers and personnel working for the United Nations,
international organizations and NGOs. Approximately 26 000 people registered within the first 10 days of its
launch on 26 January. WHO teams are working to translate the resources into all WHO official languages and
Portuguese. Many countries have also initiated translation into their own local languages.
2. WHO Critical Care Severe Acute Respiratory Infection course: https://openwho.org/courses/severe-acuterespiratory-infection
This course includes content on clinical management of patients with a severe acute respiratory infection.
Launched on 6 February, it enrolled 3500 users in its first 24 hours. The course is intended for clinicians who
are working in intensive care units in low- and middle-income countries and managing adult and pediatric
patients with severe forms of Severe Acute Respiratory Infection, including severe pneumonia, acute
respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis and septic shock.
The following online learning courses are also in production in February: an occupational health and safety briefi