HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 20th
of April 2020, 27 new cases of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19
were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand, bringing the
total number of cases to 2,792.
• Of these, more than 71% (1,999) have recovered, about 1.7% (47) have
died, and almost 27% (746) are receiving treatment.
• Only one case was identified in a person returning from outside Thailand;
likely reflecting restrictions on entry.
• A total of 16 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed
cases. Two cases attended crowded places and 8 cases are still under
investigation.
• To date, 68 of the total 77 provinces have reported cases. 35 of these 68
provinces have not reported any new cases during the past 14 days.
Bangkok has the highest number of cases (1,440), followed by Phuket
(192) and Nonthaburi (151).
UPDATE FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH
At present, the Ministry of Public Health is focusing efforts on:
• Rapid contact tracing
• Active case finding in groups who have higher risks, including low-skilled
labourers.
• Active case finding in areas where transmission is ongoing, such as
Bangkok and Phuket
• Strengthening Infection Prevention and Control in health facilities:
guidance and standards have been disseminated, including screening /
triage of all patients at the point of entry, and managing groups of HCWs
to minimize the risk of cross-over infections between teams.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,792 confirmed (27 new)
47 deaths
746 people hospitalized
103 healthcare staff
1,999 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 20 April 2020
Laboratory testing:
• From February until 17th
April, 142,589 samples have been tested, the majority through private hospitals.
• From 4th
– 17th
April, an average of 3,300 samples were tested per day and the percentage of positive cases varied
between 1.41 and 3.82.
• The utility of saliva testing is being explored in order to reduce the risk of infection to healthcare staff in collecting
nasopharyngeal swabs. This study is supported by the Ministry of Public Health in collaboration with Ramathibodi
Hospital, Chulalongkorn Hospital and Siriraj Hospital.
ICU bed capacity
• As of April 17, there are currently 132 intensive care unit beds across Bangkok and vicinity. These beds would be
able to provide specialized care, including mechanical ventilation.
• Currently, 82 of these beds are available/unoccupied. Current plans are to increase ICU beds in the Bangkok area
to 288 by end-May.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand is in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public Health, sharing
information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health to support
migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the outbreak in
Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
