HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 11th of April 2020, 45 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,518.
• Of the newly reported cases, twelve cases were identified in
people returning from outside Thailand.
• To reduce transmission from imported cases, all persons
returning from other countries will be quarantined in state-
arranged venues.
• An additional two healthcare workers are included in the newly
reported cases, bringing the total number to 86 (3.4% of all cases).
• To protect healthcare workers and the healthcare system, it is essential that everyone complies with
measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
• A total of 23 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed cases, mainly among family
members. Four of the new cases are reported in individuals who either attended crowded places, or whose
work brings them into contact with large numbers of people.
• 68 of 77 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19. The Provinces with the
highest numbers of cases are Bangkok (1280), Phuket (172), Nonthaburi (148), Samut Prakan (106) and
Yala (77). The nine Provinces that currently have no reported cases are Ang Thong, Bueng Kan, Chai Nat,
Kamphaeng Phet, Phichit, Nan, Ranong, Singburi and Trat.
UPDATE ON MEASURES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND:
• The Immigration Bureau has announced visa exemptions for foreign nationals. Information in different
languages is available
• According to the Ministry of Interior, at least 47 Provinces have a ban on the sale of alcohol. to reduce
the risk of social gatherings at home or in a community.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,518 confirmed (45 new)
35 deaths (2 new)
1,348 people hospitalized
86 healthcare staff infected (2 new)
65 severe cases
1,135 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 11 April 2020
KEY MESSAGES FROM THE NEW WHO GUIDANCE ON FACE MASKS IN THE COMMUNITY:
• It is critical that medical masks and respirators be prioritized for health care workers.
• The use of nonmedical masks made of other materials (e.g., cotton fabric) in the community setting
has not been well evaluated. There is no current evidence to make a recommendation for or against
their use in this setting.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health
to support migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
Protecting yourself and your loved ones over Songkran
Dr Panpimol Wipulakorn, Director-General, Department of
Health, Ministry of Public Health has suggested that to adapt
to the current challenges of COVID-19, celebrations should
include physical distancing.
She has discouraged people from returning to their home
towns to visits their parents and grandparents.
Given that this is such a special time of year in which children
wish to pay respects to their elders, she suggests the theme
of this year’s celebration of Songkran is “we may be
physically separate but but our hearts are still connected”.
• Greetings and well-wishes should be sent through online
or by telephone.
• For those staying in the same house with their
parents, please practice physical distancing when
paying respects.
• Gifts to parents and grandparents should be sent
though delivery services, not in person.
