Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Coronavirus (COVID-19): cancellation of GCSEs, AS
and A levels in 2020
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Coronavirus (COVID-19): cancellation of GCSEs, AS and A levels in 2020
Department
for Education
Contents
1. Did exams need to be cancelled?
2. What will happen to those who have already done some non-exam assessment?
3. How will you address the fact that students from disadvantaged backgrounds are more likely to have their grades under-predicted?
4. Will all students get their predicted grade?
5. Will schools be using mock exam results as a barometer for results – and is this fair on students as they did not know at the time these
would be used as their final mark?
6. Will the past performance of the school be taken into account when devising the calculated grade?
7. Is this an entirely new system?
8. Will universities, colleges and sixth forms accept these grades?
1. Did exams need to be cancelled?
From Friday 20 March, all educational settings are closed to everyone except the children of critical workers and
vulnerable children.
The coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak is expected to continue having a significant impact on the education system, and
the country, for months to come. Therefore, exams have been cancelled now to give pupils, parents, and teachers
certainty, and enable schools and colleges to focus on supporting vulnerable children and the children of key workers.
2. What will happen to those who have already done some non-exam
assessment?
Students who were due to sit A level, AS level or GCSE exams this summer will receive a calculated grade. The
calculated grade process will take into account a range of evidence including, for example, non-exam assessment and
mock results, and the approach will be standardised between schools and colleges. There’s separate guidance from
Ofqual on awarding GCSE, AS and A levels which includes the implications for non-exam assessment.
3. How will you address the fact that students from disadvantaged
backgrounds are more likely to have their grades under-predicted?
This summer’s calculated grades are not predicted grades. Ofqual, the independent qualifications regulator, is developing
a fair and robust process that takes into account a broad range of evidence, including assessments by schools and
colleges of the grades that students would have been likely to obtain if exams went ahead and their prior attainment.
Ofqual will make every effort to ensure that the process does not disadvantage any particular group of students.
Pupils who do not feel their calculated grade reflects their ability will have the opportunity to sit an exam as soon as is
reasonably possible after schools and colleges open again.
4. Will all students get their predicted grade?
No. We know that simply using predicted grades would not be fair to all students. The ‘centre assessment grade’ which the
exam boards will ask schools and colleges to submit for A and AS levels and GCSEs will take into account an assessment
of the likely grade that students would have obtained had exams gone ahead, and these will be standardised across
schools and colleges. For this reason, students’ final calculated grades will not necessarily reflect their predicted grades.
5. Will schools be using mock exam results as a barometer for results – and
is this fair on students as they did not know at the time these would be
used as their final mark?
Mock exam results will be one of the pieces of evidence that will be taken into account in this process, alongside other
factors. There’s separate guidance from Ofqual on awarding GCSE, AS and A levels which explains to schools and
9. What if I am unhappy with my calculated grade?
10. What about private candidates or home educated students?
11. Can private centres run GCSEs or A levels if they chose to do so?
12. Does this mean every exam in every module in every subject being cancelled, or will a limited number go ahead at GCSE and/or A
level?
13. What about vocational and technical qualifications?
14. Will students be required to do further work to contribute towards their grade?
15. Can schools and colleges take incomplete coursework into account?
16. What will young people with university offers do?
17. Do universities need to start making unconditional offers / should I accept an unconditional offer now that exams are cancelled?
18. If I already have an unconditional offer, does that remain?
19. If I take the exam option, will I still be able to go to university this year?
20. Are iGCSEs and the International Baccalaureate also cancelled?
21. How will colleges, sixth forms and universities cope with the fact that these students will have missed out on some of their education?
22. Might the exams be reinstated if the coronavirus (COVID-19) is not as bad as expected?
colleges how to do this fairly and robustly.
6. Will the past performance of the school be taken into account when
devising the calculated grade?
Ofqual’s guidance says that one of the sources of evidence schools and colleges should draw on is the performance of
this year’s students compared to those in previous years. However, this is only one of the sources of evidence that will be
taken into account.
7. Is this an entirely new system?
This is a new system, but one which builds on existing practices, as education professionals are used to making holistic
judgements about their students. These judgements will be standardised at national level to give grades that are as fair as
possible.
8. Will universities, colleges and sixth forms accept these grades?
The calculated grades awarded this summer will be formal grades, with the same status as grades awarded in any other
year. They will therefore be accepted by all institutions.
University representatives have already confirmed that they expect universities to do all they can to support students and
ensure they can progress to higher education.
9. What if I am unhappy with my calculated grade?
Ofqual and the exam boards are working to ensure that candidates are awarded a fair grade that recognises the work they
have put in. If an A level, AS level or GCSE student does not believe the correct process has been followed in their case
they will be able to appeal on that basis. Ofqual will consult shortly on the arrangements for these appeals. In addition, if a
student does not feel their grade reflects their performance, they will have the opportunity to sit an exam, as soon as is
reasonably possible after schools and colleges open again. Students will also have the option to sit their exams in summer
2021, in line with usual practice.
10. What about private candidates or home educated students?
Where schools and colleges have accepted entries from external candidates (students who they have not taught
themselves, because they have been home-schooled, following distance-learning programmes or studying independently),
those students should be taken account of in the process of producing centre assessment grades, where the head
teacher or principal is confident that they and their staff have seen sufficient evidence of the student’s achievement to
make an objective judgement.
Ofqual is also exploring urgently whether there are options for those students who do not have an existing relationship
with an exams centre and who need results this summer for progression purposes, and will provide an update as soon as
possible. Unfortunately, this is unlikely to be possible for all external candidates, some of whom may instead need to take
exams in the autumn to get their grades.
Ofqual has asked organisations that represent higher and further education providers to consider the steps that providers
could take when making admissions decisions this summer for any private candidates who do not receive a grade. They
have said that they believe that institutions will consider a range of other evidence and information for these students to
allow them to progress wherever possible.
11. Can private centres run GCSEs or A levels if they chose to do so?
No. Exam boards will not be issuing papers for this summer’s GCSE, AS and A levels so there will not be the opportunity
to sit them at any centre.
12. Does this mean every exam in every module in every subject being
cancelled, or will a limited number go ahead at GCSE and/or A level?
Exam boards will not be issuing papers for this summer’s GCSE, AS and A levels so there will not be the opportunity to sit
them in any subject.
13. What about vocational and technical qualifications?
Many students will be taking vocational or technical qualifications instead of or alongside GCSEs, AS and A levels. While
this process does not apply to those qualifications, the same aims apply. Our priority is to ensure that students and adult
learners taking vocational and technical qualifications can move on as planned to the next stage of their lives, including
starting university, college or sixth form courses, or apprenticeships in the autumn or getting a job or progressing in work.
Ofqual is working urgently with awarding organisations to develop an approach and will provide further information as
soon as possible.
14. Will students be required to do further work to contribute towards their
grade?
There is no requirement for schools and colleges to set additional mock exams or homework tasks for the purposes of
determining a centre assessment grade, and no student should be disadvantaged if they are unable to complete any work
set after schools were closed. Where additional work has been completed after schools and colleges were closed on 20
March, Ofqual is advising head teachers and principals to exercise caution where that evidence suggests a change in
performance. In many cases this is likely to reflect the circumstances and context in which the work is done.
15. Can schools and colleges take incomplete coursework into account?
Ofqual’s guidance on awarding GCSE, AS and A levels makes clear that schools and colleges do not need to ask students
to complete any unfinished non-exam assessment work for the purposes of grading. Where they do choose to take into
account coursework completed after 20 March, Ofqual is advising head teachers and principals to exercise caution where
that evidence suggests a change in performance. In many cases this is likely to reflect the circumstances and context in
which the work is done.
16. What will young people with university offers do?
The grades awarded this summer will be formal grades, with the same status as grades awarded in any other year. There
is no reason for the usual admissions cycle to be disrupted.
University representatives have already confirmed that they expect universities to do all they can to support students and
ensure they can progress to higher education
17. Do universities need to start making unconditional offers / should I
accept an unconditional offer now that exams are cancelled?
Universities should not begin making new unconditional offers and applicants should feel no pressure to accept such
offers, as they will be awarded a formal calculated grade for each exam they would have taken.
18. If I already have an unconditional offer, does that remain?
Yes. An unconditional offer means you have already met the entry requirements, so the place is yours if you want it.
19. If I take the exam option, will I still be able to go to university this year?
Students who do not feel their calculated grade reflects their performance will have the opportunity to sit an exam as soon
as is reasonably possible after the beginning of the academic year.
While it cannot be guaranteed in every circumstance, Universities UK has assured us that the majority of universities will
do all they can to ensure that such students who take this option are able to begin their course with a delayed start time.
If a student is in this situation, they should speak to the university from which they have an offer after receiving their
calculated grade.
20. Are iGCSEs and the International Baccalaureate also cancelled?
Yes. Summer exams for both international GCSEs and the International Baccalaureate have been cancelled in all
countries this year.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
21. How will colleges, sixth forms and universities cope with the fact that
these students will have missed out on some of their education?
These are extraordinary circumstances. We are working with schools, sixth forms, colleges and universities to ensure that
we do everything we can to best help students prepare for and progress to the next stage of their education.
22. Might the exams be reinstated if the coronavirus (COVID-19) is not as
bad as expected?
No. The decision has been taken to cancel all exams this summer.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
