MOHW & KCDC JOINT PRESS RELEASE
Sept. 18, 2018

Confirmed MERS Case Tested Negative
- Two tests returned negative, Patient released from isolation ward Contact: Moon Sang-jun, Division of Public Health Preparedness and Response
(043-719-9061, untohim@korea.kr)

◇ The confirmed MERS patient underwent two rounds of confirmation testing after no longer showing
MERS-related symptoms, and both results returned negative. The patient was then released from
the isolation ward to the general ward.
◇ Second confirmation testing for close contacts will be conducted on September 20th
* If test results return negative, close contacts will be released from quarantine on
September 22nd at 00:00, following the end of the 14-day monitoring period
(All close contacts tested negative after the first test on September 13th)

◇ The Korean government will continue efforts to prevent the additional spread of MERS
□ The Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW) announced that the results from the
first and second confirmation test for the MERS confirmed case have returned
negative.
○ After testing positive for MERS on September 8th, the patient was admitted to
the negative pressure isolation ward at Seoul National University Hospital for
treatment and has recently stopped showing MERS-related symptoms.
-

In

accordance

with

MERS

response

guidelines*,

the

patient

underwent

confirmation testing on September 16th and 17th, with both results returning
negative.
* 48 hours after a confirmed MERS patient’s symptoms disappear, PCR testing
of sputum samples is conducted twice in 24-hour intervals, and, if the
results return negative, the patient is released from isolation
○ The patient was released from isolation on September 18th and moved to the
general ward for further care, as necessary.

- 1 -

□

All

21

close

contacts

currently

under

quarantine

will

undergo

a

second

confirmation test* on September 20th. If results return negative, they will be
released from quarantine at the end of the 14-day monitoring period (September
22nd, 00:00).
* The first test was conducted on September 13th, with all contacts testing negative
○ Active monitoring of all 399 casual contacts (as of September 18, 18:00) will end
at the same time.
□ According to KCDC analysis of specimens collected from the confirmed case
showed that the virus is similar to the Hu Riyadh-KSA -9730 2017; MG912608
virus, and further analysis will be conducted to identify any mutations.
□ Should the second test results of close contacts return negative, KCDC will hold
another risk assessment meeting and update the infectious disease risk alert level
accordingly.
□ The Korean government announced that it will provide compensation to the
confirmed patient and close contacts for fees incurred (hospital fees, living
expenses, mental health counseling) as a result of cooperating with MERS
preventive measures.
○ The patient’s hospital fees will be covered, and living expense compensation for
patients and close contacts will be provided through emergency living funds as
they were following the 2015 MERS outbreak.
* (2018, Unit: KRW)
household

740,000,

Single-person household – 430,000, Two-person
Three-person

household

950,000,

Four-person

household 1,170,000, Five-person household 1,390,000
* Individuals who receive paid leave under the Infectious Disease Prevention
Act in addition to the 15 days of paid leave provided in accordance with
Article 60 of the Labor Standards Act are not eligible for living expense
compensation.

- 2 -

○ Psychological counseling will be provided to close contacts and their families, as
necessary, through the National Trauma Center and local mental health clinics.
○ Also, the government will compensate employers of those who were hospitalized
or quarantined with paid leave.
* Daily wage (max. 130,000 KRW/day) x Days quarantined
□ MOHW and KCDC appreciate the understanding, patience, and cooperation of
the 21 close contacts and the 399 casual contacts in quarantine measures and
other steps taken to control the spread of MERS, as well as the efforts of
healthcare professionals.
○ MOHW and KCDC also announced that it will continue its efforts in preventing
additional spread of MERS, and will review and assess all measures taken following
this imported case to identify and improve upon any gaps in the MERS prevention,
control, and response system.

□ MOHW and KCDC would like to express its appreciation to the close and casual
contacts of the confirmed case for their active cooperation. During the remaining
duration of the monitoring period, contacts are asked to continue cooperating with
monitoring procedures. Individuals who experience any MERS-like symptoms
(fever, cough, shortness of breath) are advised not to visit hospitals directly*;
instead, they should report their symptoms to the KCDC 1339 Call Center or their
local public health center and follow their instructions.
*There is a risk of infecting other individuals by visiting hospitals and emergency rooms.
○ Healthcare providers are advised to check the travel history of incoming patients
with respiratory symptoms to see if they have recently traveled to the Middle
East. The travel history of Korean nationals can be checked through the Drug
Usage Review (DUR) system, while that of foreign nationals can be checked
through direct questioning. Healthcare providers should report any patients
suspected of MERS-CoV infection to local public health centers or call the KCDC
Call Center at 1339.

○ When visiting the Middle East, individuals are advised to maintain proper personal

- 3 -

hygiene, such as washing hands frequently, and to avoid visits to local farms,
contact with camels, consumption of raw camel meat or camel milk, and
unnecessary visits to local medical facilities.
- Individuals are asked to cooperate with quarantine procedures, such as honestly
completing health status questionnaires at the time of entry.
* Additional information on the current situation will be provided upon further epidemiological
investigation to ensure rapid, accurate, and transparent communication with the public.

- 4 -

Appendix
1

Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
Overview

Details
▫MERS cases have been identified in the Middle East around the Arabian
Peninsula, with approximately 2,229 confirmed cases around the world from

Cases and
Outbreaks

2012 to June 30, 2018 (according to WHO)
▫Since January 2018, there have been 116 confirmed MERS cases (as of
September 8, 2018) in the Middle East (114 in Saudi Arabia*, 1 in UAE, 1
in Oman)
* One case was infected in Saudi Arabia and imported the virus to the UK

Pathogen

▫Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus ; MERS-CoV
▫Although the mode of transmission is uncertain, animal-to-human transmission has

Mode of
Transmission

been observed through contact with infected camels and consumption of camel meat
and milk, and limited direct and indirect human-to-human transmission has been
observed through droplet infection following close contact with infected individuals

Incubation
Period

▫Approximately 2-14 days
▫MERS patients usually experience fever, cough, sputum, shortness of breath,
and other respiratory symptoms. They may also suffer from diarrhea, vomiting,

Symptoms and
Clinical Course

and other gastrointestinal symptoms.
▫Many patients have low lymphocyte or platelet counts
▫Case Fatality Rate: The prognosis for those with pre-existing conditions or
weakened immune systems is rather poor, with a fatality rate of approximately
30%

Diagnosis

Treatment

Case
Management

▫Routing confirmation is conducted by RT-PCR testing of unique sequences of viral
RNA; confirmation by nucleic sequencing can be conducted when necessary
▫There is no cure for MERS, but individuals can be treated for their symptoms

▫Cases: Isolation of suspected or confirmed cases
▫Close Contacts: Passive surveillance of contacts of suspected cases, isolation and
active surveillance of contacts of confirmed cases

▫Hand washing, cough etiquette, and maintaining proper personal hygiene

Prevention

▫For travelers to the Middle East
- Avoid contact with camels and crowded areas; wear a mask if you experience
respiratory symptoms; avoid contact with those who have respiratory symptoms

- 5 -

Appendix
2

MERS Educational Content (English & Arabic)

- 6 -

- 7 -

- 8 -

