Global updates
As of 09 March 2020 (new cases in last 24 hours):
•

Global: 109 577 confirmed cases (3993 new)

•

China: 80 904 (45 new), 3123 deaths (23 new)

•

Outside China: 28 673 confirmed (3948 new), 686 deaths (202 new); 104
Countries/territories/ areas (3 new)

•

WHO Risk assessment: China – Very High, Regional Level – Very high, Global Level- Very
High

India Situation
As of 09 March, a total of 44 confirmed cases have been reported from India. This includes: Delhi (4),
Haryana (14), Jammu (1), Kerala (9), Ladakh (2), Punjab (1), Rajasthan (2), Tamil Nadu (1), Telangana
(1), Uttar Pradesh (9). Of these, 16 are foreign nationals. The 6 new cases from Kerala, are in addition
to the 3 cases, that have already recovered. Hospital isolation of the cases, tracing and home quarantine
of their contacts is ongoing, in the states from where cases have been reported.
All states are on high alert, for early detection and management of any further cases. As of 08 March,
there are 52 laboratories identified by the Indian Council of Medical Research, for testing of COVID-19.
A total of 57 laboratories have been identified to support sample collection and referral.
The Prime Minister is personally monitoring the preparedness and response. The Union Health and
Family Welfare Minister (HFM) is reviewing the situation daily. A Group of Ministers chaired by HFM has
been constituted to review the progress and measures taken for containment. In a suo-moto speech on
05 March, HFM provided an update on the global situation of COVID-19, number of cases in India and
the actions taken by the Government to contain further spread. He updated the house regarding
screening of passengers in airport, seaports and minor ports. Through integrated disease surveillance
system, a total of 28,529 persons were monitored under community surveillance. He updated on another
successful evacuation in bringing back 124 people including 5 foreign nationals from the COVID-19
infected cruise ship. He informed of the strengthened laboratory capacity in the country.
As per the latest India travel advisory, all international passengers irrespective of nationality are
mandated to undergo universal medical screening. Adequate screening measures have been setup and
nine more airports have been added to the existing 21, bringing the total to 30 airports. As on 9 March,
a total of 9,41,717 international passengers from 8,827 flights have been screened at airports. 1,921
passengers were identified as symptomatic and 177 of them have been hospitalized. 33,599 are under
observation while 21,867 have completed observation period (press release 9 March). Screening of
passengers is also being done in 12 major seaports and 65 minor ports in the country.

In addition to Visa restrictions already in place, passengers traveling from /having visited Italy or
Republic of Korea and desirous of entering India will need certificate of having tested negative for
COVID-19 from the designated laboratories authorized by the health authorities of these countries. This
will be enforced from 0000 Hrs of 10th March 2020.
A buffer stock of personal protective equipment (PPE) and N95 masks is maintained by the states as
well as Union Government. On 06 March, HFM chaired a high-level meeting with private hospitals in
Delhi-NCR for engaging them for COVID-19 management. Discussions focused on preparing for surge
in terms of bed capacity of hospitals for infected cases, isolation wards, etc. through private sector
alliance. Protocols for sample collection and testing were shared with the private sector.
Risk communication has been intensified. General public is reached through diverse social media and
community platforms; and material is being widely disseminated including in regional languages through
states. In order to spread awareness, special COVID-19 mobile phone caller tune was launched by all
telecom operators with basic infection prevention messages played when a caller dials-out.

WHO Response
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) support at national level
WCO has been working closely with the Ministry of Health, on preparedness and response measures
for COVID-19.
On 06 March, a National Training of Trainers (ToT) was
organized by MoHFW with WHO to support on COVID19 with a focus on strengthening Infection Prevention
Control, Surveillance and Risk Communication and
Community Engagement. The support included
development of the training materials and facilitation for
the training. This was attended by 280 officials from
states/UT. The training was also virtually attended by
1000 officials across the country.
On 07 March, WCO organized the same training for partners including UNICEF, CDC, USAID, NDMA,
AIIMS, IDEA. The training was attended by 80 participants, facilitated by 20 resource persons from
MoHFW, WHO, UNICEF, and, close to 300 field staff joined by video link.
WCO is closely working with National Centre for Diseases Control (NCDC) on disease surveillance,
with the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) on laboratory testing capacity, and the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting on risk communications. As member of the Joint Monitoring Group (JMG)
on emerging diseases, WCO has been regularly attending these meetings. JMG brings together line
ministries and agencies to provide updates as well technical guidance on preparedness and response
activities including planning for the next phase. WCO continues to provide support to ICMR on
laboratory and research protocols. WCO has also initiated exchange of information with ICMR on areas
of research and development related to COVID-19.

WHO coordination with UN partners
WCO India and UNICEF are supporting MoHFW for preparedness, response planning including
interventions for risk communication and community engagement, development of IEC materials and
their dissemination among public through various communication channels. The field offices of UNICEF
have been coordinating with State governments to plan their support in case COVID-19 situation
escalates. Toolkits for Health Service Providers for Designated and General Health facilities have been
prepared and will be rolled out.
WCO India has been updating the UN country team and health partners on COVID-19 situation with
daily information package and frequent meetings.

WCO support at state level
WHO medical officers in the field are supporting states and UTs in capacity building of rapid response
teams and medical officers, knowledge sharing, contact tracing and containment. On the request of
MoHFW, WCO has deployed four teams to support response in Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Telangana and
Rajasthan. Nine teams will be deployed to other states shortly.
For more information contact:
Dr Tran Minh Nhu Nguyen

Dr Ritu Chauhan

Team Lead

National Programme Officer

WHO India

WHO India

Email: tranminhn@who.int

Email: chauhanr@who.int

