Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: advice for the freight transport industry
Published 17 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: advice for the freight transport industry
Department
for Transport
Foreign &
Commonwealth
Office
The government is advising British nationals against all non-essential international travel.
Contents
Health and safety
Borders and travel restrictions
Insurance
Consular help
Latest health advice
This exceptional advice has been issued because the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has led to unprecedented
international border closures and other restrictions.
International and domestic freight transport (including by air, ship, road and rail, including roll-on/roll-off transports) is
classified by UK government as an essential activity in the context of its travel advice. The advice against non-essential
travel is not intended to apply to international and domestic freight transport.
FCO travel advice remains under constant review and is being updated regularly with the latest information on restrictions
and other measures in place in each country/territory. Check the latest travel adviceand sign up for email alerts for all
countries where you are travelling.
Health and safety
For the travel of accompanied goods vehicles between theUK and mainland Europe and Ireland the government is
reminding ferry operators of the importance of enabling social distance measures during longer sea crossings in respect of
sleeping accommodation, in particular. The government is reminding Eurotunnel in operating its Le Shuttle services of the
importance of health and safety responsibilities and enabling social distance measures, both at the UK and French
terminals, but also during crossings through the Channel Tunnel.
At the UK-end of journeys, domestic freight providers are also essential services. The government emphasises the health
and safety responsibilities of all organisations connected with freight transport organisations running transport terminals,
warehouses and distribution centres to provide access to drivers and crew to toilets, washing facilities and sufficient
waiting space.
The government also recommends rail freight operators (both those operating services via the Channel Tunnel and also
domestic intermodal services from ports) check specific information on cross-European trade and ensure adherence to
health and safety responsibilities.
In addition guidance has also been published by Public Health England and the Department for Transport about staff in
the transport sector.
Borders and travel restrictions
Within Europe, border controls have been re-introduced in many locations and substantial restrictions on international
travel have been imposed. The position should be checked country by country on the relevant FCO travel advice pages.
International road freight transport is exempt from many but not all of those of restrictions due to it being an essential
activity. The position may change at short notice.
Currently certain countries have closed most border points, imposed quarantine periods on incomingUK road freight
transport crew or refused entry. Road transport operators should use the Freight Transport Association’s or Road Haulage
Association’s international road transport services to check specific information based on cross-European trade
information provided to the International Road Transport Union.
Certain countries and ports have implemented restrictions on berthing, disembarking and unloading of vessels. The
department recommends maritime freight operators check specific information and guidance on international trade and
policies (including information relating to crew, berthing and isolation) at any port, and in any country, they are operating
in.
Insurance
There is advice from Public Health England to travellers in general
, for example in relation to insurance, which is part
relevant to commercial transport. In relation to insurance for drivers, crew, maintenance and business operations, the
provisions now applicable to the particular countries in respect of specific policies need to be checked carefully and
confirmed prior to departure.
The Association of British Insurers (ABI) has published information on the implications of coronavirus on travel insurance
and other types of insurance.
Consular help
Consular support is available to British nationals working overseas in the commercial road transport sector.
Read more
about the consular support FCO provides.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
Latest health advice
See the latest NHS guidance on COVID-19 for the current situation in theUK and abroad.
The National Travel Health Network and Centre (NaTHNaC) has also produced general advice on preparing for foreign
travel and how everyone can reduce the spread of respiratory viruses.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
