1
(Provisional translation)
Basic Policies for Novel Coronavirus Disease Control
by the Government of Japan
(Summary)
March 28, 2020 (Revised on April 16, 2020)
On April 7, 2020, the Head of the Novel Coronavirus Response Headquarters
declared a state of emergency under Article 32, paragraph 1 of the Act on
Special Measures for Pandemic Influenza and New Infectious Diseases
Preparedness and Response. The period during which emergency measures
should be taken under the declaration is 29 days from April 7 to May 6, 2020.
Areas where emergency measures should be taken are Saitama, Chiba, Tokyo,
Kanagawa, Osaka, Hyogo and Fukuoka Prefectures and on April 16th,
targeted areas are expanded to all 47 prefectures (the period during which
emergency measures should be taken for these areas is from April 16th to May
6th). If the emergency measures are deemed no longer necessary, the state of
emergency will be released immediately even within the period.
Even under the state of emergency, the Government of Japan will work to
minimize the impact on social and economic functions, and will not take
compulsory measures such as "lockdown" (city blockade) that is being
implemented in other countries.
This Basic Policies present unified guidance on measures to be taken by the
government, local governments, and the people together to accurately grasp
the situation and further advance counter-measures against the novel
coronavirus infectious disease.
1. Facts on current situation of the Novel Coronavirus infectious disease
In Japan, 61% of infected people are those with unknown routes of
transmission (situation up to April 13, known as of April 15). This means that
the risk of infection in daily life has started to increase in addition to the
infection in specific places where clusters were identified. Medical provision
system is strained in some areas and strengthening of the system is an urgent
issue.
From mid to late March of this year, there was an increase in the number of
individuals who appear to have been infected overseas and then entered
Japan.
In addition to the seven prefectures designated for the state of emergency on
April 7th (Tokyo, Osaka, Saitama, Chiba, Kanagawa, Hyogo and Fukuoka),
the cumulative numbers of infected people in Hokkaido, Ibaraki, Ishikawa,
Gifu, Aichi, and Kyoto have exceeded 100 by April 14. Therefore, it is
necessary to place particular emphasis on Tokyo, Osaka, Hokkaido, Ibaraki,
Saitama, Chiba, Kanagawa, Ishikawa, Gifu, Aichi, Kyoto, Hyogo, and
Fukuoka prefectures in taking measures to prevent the spread of infection
2
(These 13 prefectures are collectively called “Prefectures under Specific
Cautions"). In other prefectures too, the tendency of the spread of infection is
also observed with clusters in non-urban areas caused by the influx of people
from metropolitan areas. Since it is necessary for all the prefectures to take
concerted measures to prevent the spread of the infection when all citizens
including the government, local municipalities, relevant organizations need
to make further efforts toward long national holidays to come, the
Government designates all the prefectures as the areas where emergency
measures should be taken.
2. Overall Policies for Novel Coronavirus Disease Control
- Slow down the speed of infection by containing clusters and reducing
chances of contact.
- Minimize incidence of severe cases and death through surveillance and
appropriate medical care especially for the elderly.
- Minimize the impact on society and economy through pandemic
prevention and economic and employment measures.
3. Key points in implementing measures against novel coronavirus disease
(1)Provision and sharing of Information
Provide the public with accurate information and clear message on the
following points in the timely manner, promote awareness-raising to help
change people’s behavior and call for calm response.
- the infection situation and the medical information
- basic counter-measures against infection
- need to refrain from leaving home when feeling sick
- guidelines for visiting medical institutions
- discrimination against infected persons, close contacts and medical
personnel
- 3-Cs (closed spaces, crowded places, and close-contact settings)
- the fact that the measure of “lockdown” (city blockade) will not be taken
Provide appropriately and expeditiously related information for Japanese
national as well as foreign nationals living or staying in Japan and foreign
governments.
(2) Surveillance and Information gathering
- Identify suspected disease carrier and conduct tests that the doctor
considers necessary
- Strengthen the testing system by utilizing local and private institutes.
Grasp the PCR testing system and make necessary coordination.
- Continue to develop simple test kits for rapid diagnosis.
(3) Pandemic Prevention
- The declaration of a state of emergency on April 7 is intended to further
accelerate existing measures and to reduce the contact among people by
3
70% at minimum or 80% ideally. Restrictions on people's freedoms and
rights must be minimal. Designated prefectures (prefectures covered by
the emergency declaration) will, at first, call for voluntary cooperation
in self-restraint of leaving home as measures to prevent pandemic.
- Designated prefectures will strongly make requests not to hold events
at places where clusters could emerge or have gatherings under the 3-
Cs circumstances, especially in case of nation-wide or large events and
gatherings.
- Designated prefectures will make requests on restrictions on the use of
facilities when the spread of infection can occur. When such requests
are not met with no justifiable reason, designated prefectures will make
further requests and instructions. These requests and instructions will
be made public. When such requests and instructions are made based
on the Act, designated prefectures need to consult with the Government
and listen to the opinions of experts.
- Designated prefectures will take effective emergency measures taking
into account the characteristics of each area and give careful explanation
to the residents. The Government Response Headquarters will
coordinate with designated prefectures as necessary, listening to the
opinions of experts.
- Designated prefectures will work with the government in informing the
residents that the emergency measures are different from "lockdown"
(city blockade) and call for a calm response through asking people not to
buy up food, medicine and daily necessities in a panic.
- Designated prefectures will at first request a self-restraint of going out
while indicating the period and areas. Activities necessary for
maintaining daily life such as visiting hospitals, purchasing food,
medicine and daily necessities, going to workplaces as necessary,
exercising outdoors or taking a walk can be excluded.
- Designated prefectures will request citizens to refrain as much as
possible from moving to other prefectures for reasons such as non-urgent
and non-necessary homecoming visits or travels, especially during long
national holiday period.
- Designated prefectures will strongly discouraged citizens from visiting
eateries with hospitality services in downtown.
- Designated prefectures as well as other prefectural governments will
strongly encourage teleworking. Efforts to reduce contact with people
including through staggered work hours and bicycle commuting will be
promoted further. In workplaces, it is encouraged to take thorough
measures to prevent infection and avoid the 3-Cs.
- Businesses engaged in operations essential for ensuring the stability of
people’s lives and the national economy (exemplified in the attachment),
are required to continue their operation, depending on the
characteristics of the businesses, while fully taking measures to prevent
the spread of infection. The Government and designated prefectures will
4
work to establish a help desk for business operators, secure logistics, and
ensure a robust lifeline system, etc., in order to support smooth activities
of these businesses.
- Prefectures in metropolitan areas will thoroughly take these measures
to prevent the spread of infection so that they will not trigger nationwide
and rapid spread.
- The Government and local governments will encourage restaurants to
take necessary infection control measures by avoiding the 3Cs.
- Secure and foster experts for the counter-cluster measures and
strengthen the health center system.
- Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology will
disseminate the guiding principle on temporary closure of schools.
Prefectural governments will provide guidance to school operators on
infectious disease countermeasures such as health management. The
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare (MHLW) will provide guiding
principles of nursery schools and after-school children's clubs, etc.
regarding the down-sizing of childcare and temporary closure of
facilities. In this regard, the MHLW will also present guidance on
securing childcare during such temporary closure for children of medical
staff, those who need to continue working to maintain social functions,
and those who have difficulty taking off work including single-parents.
- The Government will continue to implement entry restrictions, travel
warnings, strengthened quarantine, and visa restrictions, from the
viewpoint of preventing the flow of infected people into Japan
(4) Medical care, etc.
The MHLW will secure a flexible medical provision system in each region,
responding to the spread of infection.
- Perform tests at the discretion of doctors and, if patients are found,
provide appropriate medical care by admitting them to hospitals.
- Establish a system for those with mild symptoms to be taken care of at
home in prefectures where an increase in patients may risk the medical
care for severely ill patients in hospitals.
The MHLW will secure medical provision structure to prepare for possible
significant increase of patients in Japan.
- Consider division of roles among medical institutions in each region.
- Secure necessary beds, personnel, and necessary medical equipment such
as respirators.
The MHLW will also notify and ensure the following measures to thoroughly
prevent nosocomial infection in medical institutions and facilities for the
elderly.
- Take every possible precautious measure to prevent workers from being a
source of infection including by thoroughly avoiding the 3-Cs.
5
- Temporarily stop receiving visitors except for emergency cases in order to
prevent infection.
- Consider measures such as suspending or restricting temporary use of
such facilities in areas where infection is prevalent.
- Isolate a suspected patient immediately and implement counter-infection
measures under the guidance of public health centers.
The Government and prefectures will prioritize securing personal protective
equipment such as masks for medical institutions that conduct PCR tests and
admit patients, and ensure that PCR tests are conducted for medical
personnel, workers and inpatients.
The MHLW will take other measures including:
- Systematic surveillance of bed occupancy in hospitals
- Prevention of infection for outpatients and pregnant women
- Provision of medical interpreters for foreigners
- Acceleration of clinical research and treatment to verify the effects of
therapeutic agents
(5) Economic and employment measures
Expeditiously implement necessary and sufficient economic and fiscal policies
without pause, taking bold measures to return the Japanese economy to a
solid growth trajectory
(6) Other important considerations
- Consideration for the human rights
- Supply of goods and materials necessary for the medical operation
- Collaboration with related organizations (including local governments,
the international community, and the research institutions)
- Maintenance of social functions
- Measures after the declaration of a state of emergency
Attachment
6
Business operators who are required to continue their business during the
period of the state of emergency
1. Maintaining Medical System
・We request the continuation of all business by medical personnel not only
for treatment of COVID-19 infections, but also for their duties to deal with
other severe diseases.
・The abovementioned businesses by medical personnel include hospitals,
pharmacies, and other manufacturing and service industries related to all the
supplies and services necessary for treatment of patients including importing,
manufacturing and sales of pharmaceuticals and medical equipment, blood
collection for blood donations, and providing meals to inpatients.
2. Continuing to protect those in need
・We request the continuation of all life support businesses for people who
need assistance, especially the elderly and the people with disabilities,
including housing and support for them .
・The abovementioned life support businesses include all manufacturing and
service industries related to the goods and services necessary for the lives of
the elderly and the people with disability, such as management of facilities
for nursing care and for people with disability, as well as providing meals to
residents of the facilities.
3. Securing stable lives of the people
・We request the continuation of all concerned businesses which provide
essential services for those who stay at home to lead minimum necessary lives.
(1) Infrastructure operation (electricity, gas, oil, petrochemical, LP gas, water
and sewage, telecommunications and data centers, etc.)
(2) Food and beverage supply (agriculture, forestry, fishery, importing,
manufacturing, processing, distribution, and online shopping of food and
beverage, etc.)
(3) Supply of daily necessities (importing, manufacturing, processing,
distribution and online shopping of household goods, etc.)
(4) Canteens, restaurants, coffee shops, home delivery and take-out, retailers
of daily necessities (department stores, supermarkets, convenience stores,
drugstores, hardware stores etc.)
(5) Maintenance of household goods (plumber, electrician, etc.)
(6) Services related to daily necessities (hotel and accommodation, public bath,
barber shop and hairdressers’ salons, laundry, veterinary, etc.)
(7) Waste disposal services (collection, transportation, and disposal of waste,
etc.)
(8) Ceremonial affairs (operators engaged in cremation and post-mortem
treatment of bodies)
(9) Media (TV, radio, newspapers, internet related business, etc.)
(10) Services for individuals (webcast, remote education, facilities and
Attachment
7
services related to maintenance of the internet environment, maintenance
services of private vehicles, etc.)
4. Maintaining the stability of the society
・With a view to maintaining the stability of the society, we request the
continuation of the businesses, at their minimum level, who provide essential
services to maintain corporate activities during the period of a state of
emergency.
(1) Financial services (banks, credit banks and credit unions, securities,
insurance, credit cards, and other settlement services etc.)
(2) Logistics and transportation services (railways, buses, taxis, trucks,
maritime transportation and port management, aviation and airport
management, postal services, etc.)
(3) Maintenance of manufacturing and service industries necessary for
national defense (aircraft, submarines, etc.)
(4) Services necessary to maintain corporate activities and security
(maintenance and security of building, etc.)
(5) Social infrastructure necessary for safety and security (management of
public goods such as of rivers and roads, public works, waste disposal,
hazardous goods management based on respective law, etc.)
(6) Administrative services (police, fire fighting, other administrative
services)
(7) Childcare services (daycare centers, etc.)
5. Others
・Among medical and manufacturing industries, we request the continuation
of the following business operators in consideration of infection prevention:
operators who are difficult to stop production line due to the characteristics
of the equipment (such as blast furnaces and semiconductor factories); and
operators who produce essentials (including important items in supply
chains) for protection of the people who need medical care and support, as
well as for maintenance of social infrastructure. We also request the
continuation of the business operators who sustain medical care, the lives of
the people, and maintenance of the national economy.
