CORONAVIRUS
STAY AT HOME
PROTECT THE NHS
SAVE LIVES
Stay at home
The single most important action you can take is
to stay at home in order to protect the NHS and
save lives.
You should only leave the house for very limited reasons:
Shopping for basic necessities, for example food and
medicine, as infrequently as possible.
One form of exercise a day, for example a run, walk,
or cycle - alone or with members of your household.
Any medical need, including to donate blood, avoid risk of
harm, provide care or help a vulnerable person.
Travelling for work purposes, but only where you cannot
work from home.
These are exceptions – and when doing these activities, you should
minimise time spent outside of the home and ensure you are two metres
apart from anyone outside of your household.
Critical workers, and parents of vulnerable children, may leave the house
to take their children to and from school or their childcare provider.
More detail is available online. Children can be moved between homes
if their parents live separately.
2
Help stop the infection spreading
and support each other
• Wash your hands with soap and water often –
do this for at least 20 seconds.
• Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue or your sleeve
(not your hands) when you cough or sneeze.
• Put used tissues in the bin immediately and wash your
hands afterwards.
• Don’t touch your eyes, nose or mouth if your hands are not clean.
• Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces and objects in your
home, such as door handles and taps.
• Shop responsibly, follow advice in stores, and only buy what you
need for yourself and your family, and those you’re supporting.
1 2 3
Palm to palm The backs of hands In between the fngers
4 5 6
The back of the fngers The thumbs The tips of the fngers
3
Symptoms
You may have coronavirus if you have either of the following symptoms,
however mild:
• a high temperature.
• a new, continuous cough.
Anyone who has these symptoms must stay at home until the symptoms
have ended, and in all cases for at least seven days. Everyone else in the
household must stay at home for at least 14 days after the frst person’s
symptoms appear, even if they themselves do not have symptoms.
If anyone else develops symptoms during that time, that individual must
stay home for an additional seven days from when they developed
symptoms. Once seven days have passed and provided symptoms have
ended, they no longer need to isolate.
Do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital.
Use NHS online services. Only call 111 if you are not able to get
online, you have been instructed to call, or your symptoms worsen.
Call 999 if you have a serious or life-threatening emergency, and
tell the call adviser if you have coronavirus symptoms.
4
DAY PERSON A PERSON B PERSON C PERSON D
01 Develops
symptoms,
triggering
7-day
isolation
for herself
and 14 days
for her
household
02
03 Develops
symptoms
and starts
7-day count
04
05
06
07
08 Isolation ends if
symptoms have
stopped
09
10 Isolation ends if
symptoms have
stopped
11
12
13 Develops
symptoms
and starts
7-day count
14
15 No symptoms
isolation ends
16
17
18
19
20 Isolation ends
if symptoms
have stopped
5
Advice for those who are 70 and over,
have an underlying health condition
or are pregnant
People who are 70 and over, or those who have an
underlying health condition, are likely to be more seriously
affected. It is even more important that you protect yourself
now by following the advice above.
If you are at very high risk due to a serious underlying health condition,
you should have already received a letter from the NHS containing
specifc guidance about what to do.
If you need shopping or medication, ask family, friends or neighbours
to drop these at the door, or if possible, order online. Use NHS online
services or the NHS App to book appointments or order repeat
prescriptions – only phone if this is not possible.
GP consultations should be done over the phone or online, to minimise
risk to you and other patients. GP practices may postpone non-urgent
health checks or routine appointments.
There is helpful information and advice for pregnant women
about coronavirus on the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists’ website.
6
Support for businesses and workers
The Government knows that all these measures have a huge
impact on businesses, households and people across the
country and has taken action to protect lives and incomes.
For businesses:
• More than £330bn is being made available in loans and guarantees.
• Another £20bn is being given to businesses through tax relief
and cash grants.
• HMRC is deferring VAT payments for the next quarter.
For workers and families:
• The Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme means employees can
receive 80 per cent of their wages up to a maximum of £2,500 per
month.
• The Coronavirus Self Employment Income Support Scheme will
provide a grant to most self-employed individuals or partnerships,
worth 80% of their profts up to a cap of £2,500 per month.
• Extra support for the unemployed and those on low incomes
through Universal Credit and Tax Credits, worth up to £1,040.
• Nearly £1bn of additional support for renters.
• Mortgage holidays of three months for anyone in diffculty due to
coronavirus, including owners of buy to let properties.
This is just some of the support available for businesses and workers.
Further information is available online.
7
Going to work
You may travel for work purposes, but only where you cannot
work from home.
Employers and employees should discuss their working arrangements,
and employers should take every possible step to facilitate their
employees working from home.
Certain jobs require people to travel to their place of work.
If you cannot work from home then you can still travel to work,
provided neither you nor any of your household have coronavirus
symptoms. This is consistent with advice from the Chief Medical Offcer.
Further information on all these areas and more
is available online
If you live in England go to gov.uk/coronavirus
If you live in Scotland go to gov.scot/coronavirus-covid-19
If you live in Wales go to gov.wales/coronavirus
If you live in Northern Ireland go to nidirect.gov.uk/campaigns/
coronavirus-covid-19
To receive this information in other languages or alternative
formats, please visit gov.uk/coronavirus.
If you have diffculties communicating or hearing, you can call
18001 111 on a textphone or access the NHS 111 British Sign
Language (BSL) interpreter service through www.nhs.uk/111.
STAY AT HOME. PROTECT THE NHS. SAVE LIVES.
8
