Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 5 March 2020
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 5 March 2020

HIGHLIGHTS
•

•

•
•
•
•

THAILAND SITUATION
On the 5th of March 2020, the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand (MoPH)
IN NUMBERS
announced four new cases of COVID-19, bringing the total number of
total and new cases in
last 24 hours
cases in Thailand to 47. These are imported cases, all males, two from
Iran, and two from Italy. None of the cases are linked.
The four new cases: 1) An Italian national, 29, a company employee,
47 confirmed (4 new)
recently traveled from Italy, arrived 1 March to Thailand, walk-in to a
1 death
hospital with symptoms on 2 March, he is now admitted at Chonburi
1,615 persons under
Hospital; 2) a Thai national, 42, an office worker, returned from Italy on 2
Investigation / treatment
March, walk-in to a hospital on 3 March with fever, he is now admitted at
a private hospital in Chonburi; 3) a Chinese national, 22, a student from
Iran, transiting through Bangkok on 1 March, detected by thermo-scanner at the infectious disease control
point at Suvarnabhumi Airport, now admitted to Bamrasnaradura Infectious Diseases Institute; and 4) a Thai
national, 20, a student from Iran, arrived to Bangkok 27 February, visited a hospital in Nakhon Si Thammarat
on 2 March, with symptoms, now hospitalized.
The total number of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases reported in Thailand now stands at 47, of which
31 have recovered, 15 are in hospital and one has died. One patient remains severely unwell.
The number of PUIs currently stands at 3,895. In total, 1,615 PUIs are under treatment/investigation; this
number includes people being treated for other conditions who are no longer suspected of having COVID19 infection.
The MoPH announced a new, shorter list of COVID-19-affected countries or areas: China (including Hong
Kong and Macao), Republic of Korea, Iran, and Italy. Possible restrictions on visitors from the listed countries
have not yet been announced.
According to the MoPH announcement, Thailand’s Prime Minister today directed Government Ministries to
identify places for use as quarantine centres and described a category of “self-quarantine” for some visitors
from COVID-19-affected countries to include minimizing social contact and to wear a mask if travel to
crowded public areas is required. The Ministry statement further advised the public to not panic, to use
common sense in confronting COVID-19, and to not shun persons who may be suspected of being infected.

Nationality Imported case
Chinese

Locally transmitted
cases

Total

26

0

26

Thai

9

11*

20

Italian

1
36

1
11

47

*Epidemiologically linked to an imported case/local confirmed case
RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
The basic principles to reduce the general risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections, including by the
virus causing COVID-19, include the following:
• Avoiding close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections.
• Frequent hand-washing, especially after direct contact with ill people or their environment.
• Avoiding unprotected contact with farm or wild animals.
• People with symptoms of acute respiratory infection should practice cough etiquette (maintain distance, cover
coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clothing, and wash hands).
• Within healthcare facilities, enhance standard infection prevention and control practices in hospitals, especially
in emergency departments.
NEW advice from WHO on the survivability of the SARS-CoV-2 virus on surfaces & cleaning practices in
different settings, available here.
WHO does not recommend any specific health measures for travellers. In case of symptoms suggestive of
respiratory illness either during or after travel, travellers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share
their travel history with their healthcare provider.

MEDIA
•
•

WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak and through its website provides
relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies. Media queries can be directed to
sethawebmaster@who.int and risleyp@who.int
WHO Thailand’s Twitter and Facebook accounts post useful information on hygiene and protection, such
as when and how to use masks, as well as relevant WHO technical guidelines and other content related to
the novel coronavirus situation in Thailand and globally.

WHO THAILAND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
WHO Thailand’s strategic objectives to support Thailand’s response are to:
•
•
•
•
•

Limit human-to-human transmission including reducing secondary infections among close contacts and
health care workers, preventing transmission amplification events, and preventing further spread within
as well as to and from Thailand i;
Identify, isolate and care for patients early, including providing optimized care for infected patients;
Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission and infection, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines;
Communicate critical risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation; and
Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships.

PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
•

Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.

•
•
•
•
•

Thailand is also updating its dedicated national pandemic influenza preparedness plan (pending approval
by the Prime Minister’s Cabinet).
With WHO support, the National Institute of Health of Thailand is supporting specimen testing for other
countries as requested.
The Health Ministry is conducting modelling exercises with the National Research Council of Thailand to
forecast possible scenarios and outcomes as the outbreak evolves in Thailand.
Visitors to Thailand traveling from affected areas are being screened and provided information upon arrival
by the Ministry of Public Health, including how to report any possible illness to the Department of Disease
Control using the 1422 hotline.
The Ministry has also introduced a self-reporting online tool, available in Thai, English and Chinese, which
can be accessed here.

What WHO is doing in Thailand
•
•

WHO Thailand remains in regular and direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry
of Public Health, sharing information with the Government including key developments elsewhere, as well
as guidelines and updates;
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand;

USEFUL LINKS
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, access the WHO Thailand website:
www.who.int/thailand
For the latest worldwide figures and technical advice about the outbreak, including how to protect yourself,
access WHO Headquarters’ website: www.who.int including daily global situation reports and WHO’s
technical support worldwide to the COVID-19 response.
The International Health Regulations (IHR) can be viewed here.
For the latest on the Thai government response, access the Department of Disease Control, Thai
Ministry of Public Health COVID-19 landing page. *
The Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422 (dialed from within Thailand).
The Thai Communicable Diseases Act (revised in 2015) is available here.
For a comprehensive 2019-nCoV global case-tracker, access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre
for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE): in English and Thai.
Global research on novel coronavirus COVID-19
The Global Health Network - Coronavirus Outbreak Knowledge Hub - a pop-up area on The Global Health
Network serves as a knowledge hub and access to guidance on COVID-19.
(Note: WHO does not take responsibility for content on external websites.)

For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the 2019-nCoV outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
i

This can be achieved through a combination of public health measures, such as rapid identification, diagnosis and management of
the cases, identification and follow up of the contacts, infection prevention and control in healthcare settings, implementation of health
measures for travellers, awareness-raising in the population and risk communication

