Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Explanation of the updates to infection prevention
and control guidance
Updated 4 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: infection prevention and control (IPC)
Public Health
England
1. Process for updating the guidance (as published on 2 April 2020)
Public Health England (PHE) has worked with NHS England and NHS Improvement, and the Devolved Administrations to
review the UK’s infection prevention and control recommendations for COVID-19.
PHE also consulted with the Royal College of Nursing, other Royal Colleges and professional societies.
Having assessed the available evidence and feedback received from guidance users, we have updated sections to
improve the guidance and ensure that we continue to make recommendations that will help prevent the spread of COVID-
Contents
1. Process for updating the guidance (as published on 2 April 2020)
2. Main changes to the guidance
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
19 and keep people safe.
2. Main changes to the guidance
three new tables have been added to clearly explain the PPE required for different common clinical scenarios – one for
hospitals, one for primary care, outpatient and community care and one for ambulance and first responders
an additional, fourth table describes when to use PPE for all patient encounters (not just patients with suspected or
confirmed COVID-19) at a time when there is sustained community transmission of COVID-19, as is currently occurring
in the UK, and the likelihood of any patient having coronavirus infection is raised
the guidance explains that in some circumstances PPE can be worn for an entire session (such as a ward round) and
does not need to be changed between each patient
patient contact is now defined as being within 2 metres (rather than within 1 metre) of a patient, which is more
precautionary and is consistent with the distancing recommendations used elsewhere
hand-washing advice has been updated to include washing of forearms, when forearms have been exposed or may
have been exposed to respiratory droplets or other body fluids
FFP2 and N95 respirators may be used for some aerosol-generating procedures if FFP3 respirators are not available.
FFP3 respirators offer a slightly higher level of protection than FFP2 respirators
advice on re-usable PPE components, including the need to refer to manufacturer’s guidance on decontamination
recommendations about the use of facemasks by patients
general formatting improvements to make it easier to access different sections of the guidance
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
