1
(Provisional translation)
Basic Policies for Novel Coronavirus Disease Control
(Revised on April 7, 2020)
*with the declaration of a state of emergency on April 7, the Basic Policies
decided on March 28 have been revised. Key points of the newly added
elements are as follows:
On April 7, 2020, the Head of the Novel Coronavirus Response Headquarters
declared a state of emergency under Article 32, paragraph 1 of the Act on
Special Measures for Pandemic Influenza and New Infectious Diseases
Preparedness and Response. The period during which emergency measures
should be taken under the declaration is 29 days from April 7 to May 6, 2020.
Areas where emergency measures should be taken are Saitama, Chiba, Tokyo,
Kanagawa, Osaka, Hyogo and Fukuoka Prefectures. If the emergency
measures are deemed no longer necessary, the state of emergency will be
released immediately even within the period.
Even under the state of emergency, the Government of Japan will work to
minimize the impact on social and economic functions, and will not take
compulsory measures such as "lockdown" (city blockade) that is being
implemented in other countries.
1. Facts on current situation of the Novel Coronavirus infectious disease
In Japan, a total of 3,817 infected cases and 80 deaths in 44 prefectures have
been confirmed by April 6, since January 15, 2020 when the first case was
confirmed. In particular, recently 40.6% of infected people are those with
unknown routes of transmission (situation up to April 1, known as of April 4).
This means that in addition to the infection in specific places where clusters
were identified, the risk of infection in daily life, which was previously limited,
has started to increase. Medical provision system is strained in some areas
and strengthening of the system is an urgent issue.
In particular, from March 16 to April 1, the number of reported cases jumped
from 817 to 2,299, with a doubling time (the time required for the number of
infections to double) of 4.0 days.
2
From mid to late March of this year, there was an increase in the number of
individuals who appear to have been infected overseas and then entered
Japan. The counties where they appeared to have infected have also become
widespread.
Concerning the domestic medical provision system, Tokyo and Osaka
prefectures, where the number of infected people is rapidly increasing, have
announced that patients with mild symptoms who do not need hospitalization
will be switched to treatment at accommodation facilities as there is a
possibility that the provision of inpatient medical care for severely ill patients
may be affected.
In addition, Kanagawa Prefecture, which is adjacent to Tokyo and has more
than 200 infected people, is also planning to switch inpatient medical care. A
strained medical provision system is starting to appear as a reality, especially
in metropolitan areas.
As of April 6, the cumulative number of infected people was 1,123 in Tokyo
and 429 in Osaka, and the doubling time in the past week was 5.0 days in
Tokyo and 6.6 days in Osaka. Moreover, there is a risk of a further surge in
the number of infected people. In addition, the cumulative number of infected
people in neighboring prefectures, namely Saitama, Chiba, Kanagawa, Hyogo,
and Kyoto, exceeds 100 respectively, with almost half of those infected have
unknown routes of transmission in all prefectures except Kyoto. Furthermore,
the spread of infection is rapid in Fukuoka prefecture, where the cumulative
number of cases reported is over 100 with the doubling time of about 3 days,
and the proportion of cases with unknown routes of infection accounts for 70%.
Therefore, it is necessary to place particular emphasis on Tokyo, Osaka,
Saitama, Chiba, Kanagawa, Hyogo, and Fukuoka prefectures in taking
measures to prevent the spread of infection.
2. Overall Policies for Novel Coronavirus Disease Control (The policies
decided on March 28 stand)
3. Key points in implementing measures against novel coronavirus disease
(1) Provision and sharing of Information
Inform the public that the government will not take measures such as
"lockdown" (city blockade), and call for a calm response from the people (self-
restraint of travel across prefectures, such as nonessential visits to
3
hometowns and travel, avoiding flooding of shops and panic buying).
(2) Surveillance and Information gathering
(The policies decided on March 28 stand.)
(3) Pandemic Prevention
The declaration of a state of emergency on April 7 is intended to further
accelerate existing measures.
On the other hand, restrictions on people's freedoms and rights must be
minimal. Designated prefectures (prefectures covered by the emergency
declaration) will, at first, request residents to cooperate voluntarily in self-
restraint of leaving home as measures to prevent pandemic. Requests and
instructions on restrictions on the use of facilities should be made after
assessing the effects of such requests for voluntary cooperation in refraining
from leaving home.
- Designated prefectures will take effective emergency measures taking into
account the characteristics of each area and provide careful explanation to
the residents. The Government Response Headquarters will coordinate
with designated prefectures as necessary, listening to the opinions of
experts.
- Designated prefectures will work with the government in informing the
residents that the emergency measures are different from "lockdown" (city
blockade). Designated prefectures will also ask people to refrain from
travel across prefectures, and call for a calm response in order to prevent
confusion including panic buying of food, medicine and daily necessities.
- Designated prefectures will at first request a self-restraint of going out
while indicating the period and area as necessary. Examples of outing that
are not covered by such request would include activities necessary for
maintaining daily life such as visiting hospitals, purchasing food, medicine
and daily necessities, going to work as necessary, exercising outdoors or
taking a walk. Appropriate period for requesting self-restraint is about 30
days, taking into account the average period from the date of infection to
the date of onset (average incubation period). However, decisions will be
made flexibly to shorten or extend the period as appropriate.
- While going to work is excluded from the requests for self-restraint,
designated prefectures should strongly promote teleworking. Even in case
4
of going to work, efforts to reduce contact with people, such as staggered
work hours and bicycle commuting will be promoted even more strongly
than ever. In the workplace, taking thorough measures to prevent infection
will be encouraged. People will be encouraged to refrain from visiting
eateries with hospitality services in downtown areas, regardless of age, etc.
Going out of one’s living area is also covered by the request for self-
restraint.
- Businesses that perform operations essential for ensuring the stability of
people's lives and the national economy (exemplified in the attachment),
are required to continue their operation, depending on the characteristics
of the business, while fully taking measures to prevent the spread of
infection. The Government and designated prefectures will work to
establish a help desk for business operators, secure logistics systems, and
ensure a robust lifeline system, etc., in order to support smooth activities
of these businesses.
- Designated prefectures will make request to restrict the holding of events
that may lead to the spread of infection. When a request is not met with
no justifiable reason, instructions will be issued and these requests and
instructions will be made public. - The Government and local governments
will encourage restaurants to take necessary infection control measures to
prevent places where the "3Cs" (closed spaces, crowded places, and close-
contact settings) overlap. They will also ensure that request for self-
restraint in going out to entertainment facilities such as cabarets and
nightclubs is widely known, based on the current circumstance where
clusters emerge in such place.
Prefectures in metropolitan areas will take sufficient measures described
above to prevent the spread so that they will not trigger nationwide and rapid
spread, in view of the high population density and their being important
transportation hubs.
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology will
disseminate the guiding principle on temporary closure of schools. Prefectural
governments will provide guidance to school operators on infectious disease
countermeasures such as health management. The Ministry of Health, Labor
and Welfare will provide guiding principles of nursery schools and after-
5
school children's clubs, etc. regarding the down-sizing of childcare and
temporary closure of facilities. In this regard, the Ministry will also present
guidance on securing childcare during such temporary closure for children of
medical staff, those who need to continue working to maintain social functions,
and those who have difficulty taking off work including single-parents.
(4) Medical care, etc.
The Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare will notify and ensure the
following measures, from the viewpoint of thoroughly preventing nosocomial
infection in medical institutions and facilities for the elderly, under
cooperation with local governments.
- Take every possible precaution to prevent workers from being a source of
infection by thoroughly avoiding the place where "3Cs" overlap at the same
time, by making sure for workers to wear masks, wash and disinfect hands,
disinfect regularly shared facilities, maintain a certain distance each other
when eating and drinking, keep their daily health tracks and stay home if
their physical condition is not perfect.
- Temporarily cease reception of visits except for emergency in order to
prevent infection from visiting persons.
- Consider measures such as suspending or restricting temporary use of
facilities such as day-care, limiting outings and overnight stays of
inpatients and users, in areas where infection is prevalent.
- Isolate a suspected case immediately and implement infection
countermeasures under the guidance of public health centers, in case of
suspecting a new case of COVID-19 infection from hospitalized patients or
users,
The Government and prefectures will prioritize securing personal protective
equipment such as masks for medical institutions that conduct PCR tests and
admit patients for hospitalizations, and will take the initiative to ensure PCR
tests conducted for medical personnel, workers and inpatients.
(5) Economic and employment measures (The policies decided on March 28
stand)
(6) Other important considerations
6
Consideration for human rights including prevention of reputational damage
of medical personnel, etc.
Request, based on the Act, of emergency transportation and procurement of
goods and materials necessary to secure the operation of the medical system,
etc., .
Maintaining social functions;
- Measures to prevent infection of personnel of government organizations
and other public institutions and to ensure continuance of their duties
- Continued operation of businesses essential to ensuring the stability of
people's lives and the national economy
7
Attachment
Business operators who are required to continue their business during the
period of the state of emergency
1. Maintaining Medical System
・We request the continuation of all business by medical personnel not only
for treatment of COVID-19 infections, but also for their duties to deal with
other severe diseases.
・The abovementioned businesses by medical personnel include hospitals,
pharmacies, and other manufacturing and service industries related to all the
supplies and services necessary for treatment of patients including
importing, manufacturing and sales of pharmaceuticals and medical
equipment, blood collection for blood donations, and providing meals to
inpatients.
2. Continuing to protect those in need
・We request the continuation of all life support businesses for people who
need assistance, especially the elderly and the people with disabilities,
including housing and support for them .
・The abovementioned life support businesses include all manufacturing and
service industries related to the goods and services necessary for the lives of
the elderly and the people with disability, such as management of facilities
for nursing care and for people with disability, as well as providing meals to
residents of the facilities.
3. Securing stable lives of the people
・We request the continuation of all concerned businesses which provide
essential services for those who stay at home to lead minimum necessary lives.
(1) Infrastructure operation (electricity, gas, oil, petrochemical, LP gas, water
and sewage, telecommunications and data centers, etc.)
(2) Food and beverage supply (agriculture, forestry, fishery, importing,
manufacturing, processing, distribution, and online shopping of food and
beverage, etc.)
(3) Supply of daily necessities (importing, manufacturing, processing,
distribution and online shopping of household goods, etc.)
8
(4) Canteens, restaurants, coffee shops, home delivery and take-out, retailers
of daily necessities (department stores, supermarkets, convenience stores,
drugstores, hardware stores etc.)
(5) Maintenance of household goods (plumber, electrician, etc.)
(6) Services related to daily necessities (hotel and accommodation, public bath,
barber shop and hairdressers’ salons, laundry, veterinary, etc.)
(7) Waste disposal services (collection, transportation, and disposal of waste,
etc.)
(8) Ceremonial affairs (operators engaged in cremation and post-mortem
treatment of bodies)
(9) Media (TV, radio, newspapers, internet related business, etc.)
(10) Services for individuals (webcast, remote education, facilities and
services related to maintenance of the internet environment, maintenance
services of private vehicles, etc.)
4. Maintaining the stability of the society
・With a view to maintaining the stability of the society, we request the
continuation of the businesses, at their minimum level, who provide essential
services to maintain corporate activities during the period of a state of
emergency.
(1) Financial services (banks, credit banks and credit unions, securities,
insurance, credit cards, and other settlement services etc.)
(2) Logistics and transportation services (railways, buses, taxis, trucks,
maritime transportation and port management, aviation and airport
management, postal services, etc.)
(3) Maintenance of manufacturing and service industries necessary for
national defense (aircraft, submarines, etc.)
(4) Services necessary to maintain corporate activities and security
(maintenance and security of building, etc.)
(5) Social infrastructure necessary for safety and security (management of
public goods such as of rivers and roads, public works, waste disposal,
hazardous goods management based on respective law, etc.)
(6) Administrative services (police, fire fighting, other administrative
services)
(7) Childcare services (daycare centers, etc.)
9
5. Others
・Among medical and manufacturing industries, we request the continuation
of the following business operators in consideration of infection prevention:
operators who are difficult to stop production line due to the characteristics
of the equipment (such as blast furnaces and semiconductor factories); and
operators who produce essentials (including important items in supply
chains) for protection of the people who need medical care and support, as
well as for maintenance of social infrastructure. We also request the
continuation of the business operators who sustain medical care, the lives of
the people, and maintenance of the national economy.
