F.No. V-16020/73/2020-INI-I
SOP for reallocation of residents/ PG students and nursing students as
part of hospital management of COVID
Deployment of Residents in Various Facilities Designated for Screening and
Management of Patients with COVID-19 and the non covid area of the hospital (in this
SOP, the term “resident” includes DNB and CPS students)
The hospital may be divided into 3 broad zones; i) non covid area, ii) covid area looking after
patients with mild to moderate illness and iii) critical area like the ICU. In addition a triage
area needs to be developed in the emergency where patients with acute severe respiratory
illness will be coming.
1. Residents/ DNB/ CPS students will be categorized based on their parent
departments, primarily keeping in mind their current engagement in managing
critically ill patients. (See Annexure 1). In brief the categories will be as follows:
a. Category A: Core Departments
b. Category B: Clinical specialties already running ICU/HDU under their
care
c. Category C: Other specialties with clinical post-graduates, but not running
ICU/HDU under their care
d. Category D: All other clinical specialties with limited or no responsibility
for critically ill patients
e. Category E: Medically trained (MBBS) residents from pre-clinical and
para-clinical departments
f. Category F: Interns
2. Facilities will be categorized based on the characteristics of the patients who will
be attended there, and the management decisions which will need to be
implemented. In brief, the three levels of health facilities will be:
a. Level A: Screening areas
b. Level B: Facility for non-critically ill hospitalized patients
c. Level C: Facility for critically ill hospitalized patients
3. Team constitution for each level of health facility will be as follows:
a. Level A (Screening Facility): Team Leader from B or C Category of
Resident; Teams to include residents primarily from C, D and F
b. Level B (Facility for non-critically ill hospitalized patient: Team Leader
from A or B; Teams to include residents primarily from C and D.
c. Level C (Facility for critically ill hospitalized patients): Residents only
from Category A and B to be posted here.
It has been also decided that Category E residents can be posted at any Level of health
facility, primarily for coordination activities.
It is pertinent to note that roles and responsibilities must be made clear by the Team
Leaders and / or the supervising faculty at each level of facility.
4. The total number of individuals required per team / shift and the duration of a shift
(depending on the need to wear PPE) will be decided by the COVID-19 Task
Force and the Faculty-in-charge for the various levels of facilities. The total
number of individuals per team can be modified based on patient load in a facility
and / or the proportion of critically ill patients. It is however suggested, that the
numbers can be arrived on after the experience of the first few days of
management at these facilities, and then serve as a template for future planning.
5. Shift durations should be adjusted such that the start and end of shifts will not be
at a time when it is inconvenient to travel. The internal working arrangements of a
shift can be at the discretion of the Faculty-in-charge of the facilities, taking into
account various aspects, including, but not restricted to the duration of wearing
PPE.
6. The total duration wherein an individual can be posted at any level of facility
should be worked out to prevent burn out. This duration can be varied according
to the level of facility.
Training of residents:
It is also important to ensure linkage between the team providing training and the COVID-19
Task Force which is responsible for deployment of residents. No resident should be posted at
any COVID-19 facility without undergoing an essential training module, as is being
conducted by hospital infection control team.
Additional training must be given at the facility where the resident is posted – keeping the
three levels of facility in mind. Hence, if there are two locations where screening takes place,
the content of the facility level training must be the same, even if it is being delivered by
different team leaders at the different physical locations. This will ensure that all key aspects
of training are covered, irrespective of site of delivery and trainer. The respective Faculty-in-
charge of these facilities will need to coordinate to ensure that this uniform level of training is
devised and delivered.
Training about COVID-19, and other aspects of clinical evaluation of patients should also be
made available for residents, especially those drawn from departments where there is either
no regular patient-care activity (pre- and para- clinical departments) or if they so desire, even
those with a limited engagement with sick patients. It would be appropriate that this
module(s) is developed by the COVID-19 Task Force.
We may consider including psychologists to be part of the training, to enhance motivation of
participating residents.
Faculty Deployment:
The same general principles of Category of Department (based on clinical exposure and
participation in the management of critically ill patients) and Level of Facility should be used
for deployment of faculty for this purpose.
Private hospitals/ colleges:
The same principles may be applied to private institutions also.
Dental students:
A similar broad guideline shall be issued for dental doctors if the need arises. They must be
trained in infection control from now onwards.
Annexure -1
Categorization of Residents based on parent departments
Category A: Core Departments
1. Department of Anaesthesiology and Critical care: all departments of anaesthesia
(main hospital and centres).
2. Department of Medicine
3. Department of Pulmonary Medicine
4. Department of Geriatric Medicine
5. Department of Emergency Medicine
Category B: Clinical Specialities who are already running ICU/HDU
A. Medical Specialities
1. Department of Cardiology
2. Department of Gastroenterology
3. Department of Neurology
4. Department of Nephrology
5. Department of Paediatrics
6. Department of Medical Oncology
7. Department of Hematology
B. Surgical Specialities
1. Department of GI Surgery
2. Department of Neurosurgery
3. Department of CTVS
4. Department of ENT
5. Department of Paediatric Surgery
6. Department of Surgical Disciplines
7. Department of Surgical Oncology
8. Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery
Category C: Other Clinical Specialities with a clinical post-graduation but not currently
running ICU/HDU
A. Medical Specialities
1. Department of Endocrinology
2. Department of Rheumatology
3. Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology
4. Department of Radiotherapy / Radiation Oncology
B. Surgical Specialities
1. Department of Orthopedics
2. Department of Urology
Category D: All Other Clinical Specialities with limited responsibility for critically sick
patients
1. Department of Dermatology
2. Department of Ophthalmology
3. Department of PMR
4. Department of Psychiatry
5. Centre for Community Medicine
6. Department of Transfusion Medicine
Category E: All medically trained (MBBS) residents from Pre- and Para-Clinical departments
1. Anatomy
2. Physiology
3. Biochemistry
4. Biophysics
5. Pathology
6. Microbiology
7. Forensic Medicine
8. Pharmacology
9. Lab Medicine
10. Nuclear Medicine
11. Radio-diagnosis
Nursing Student allocation to handle manpower shortage for COVID-19
As our country is facing an unprecedented public health emergency with the
COVID-19 pandemic affecting several parts of the nation. The cases of COVID -
19 are increasing the need for more manpower is essential to handle the pandemic
situation.
If the need arises, students can be roped in to handle the crisis, as per their level of
skills and training. The table below shows how students of Nursing Colleges can
be allocated in order to handle manpower shortage.
NON COVID -19 patients
(Screening)
Mild to Moderate
COVID -19 patients
Critical
COVID- 19 patients
*B.Sc (Hons)2nd
year
Nursing students
**B.Sc (Hons) 4th
year
Nursing students
***M.Sc. Nursing
students
(Both 1st
and 2nd
year)
*B.Sc (Hons) 1st
year
Nursing students
**B.Sc (Hons) 3rd
year
Nursing students
***B.Sc.(PB)nursing
students
(Both 1st
and 2nd
year)
*B.Sc (Hons)1st
and 2nd
year nursing students are the novices, hence can be
utilized in the caring for Non COVID-19 patients. The faculties of college of
nursing college can accompany them while they are in the clinicals.
**B.Sc (Hons)3rd
and 4th
year nursing students are more skilled and experienced,
so they can be utilized to take care of mild to moderate COVID-19 patients.
***M.Sc. Nursing students and B.Sc. (PB)nursing students are Registered
Nursing Officers and can be utilized to take care of severe COVID- 19 patients.
