1
39 Victoria Street
London
SW1H 0EU
Sir Simon Stevens
Chief Executive Officer
NHS England & Improvement
20 March 2020
Dear Simon,
Covid-19 – Notice under Regulation 3(4) of the Health Service Control of
Patient Information Regulations 2002
The health and social care system is taking action to manage and mitigate the spread
and impact of the current outbreak of Covid-19. Action to be taken will require the
sharing and processing of confidential patient information by and with health
organisations and other bodies engaged in disease surveillance for the purposes of
protecting public health, providing healthcare services to the public and monitoring and
managing the outbreak.
I am therefore writing to you to serve notice on NHS England & Improvement, under
Regulation 3(4) of the Health Service Control of Patient Information Regulations 2002
(COPI) to require NHS England & Improvement to process confidential patient
information in the manner set out below for purposes set out in Regulation 3(1) of
COPI (insofar as those purposes relate to the current outbreak of Covid-19).
1. Purpose of this Notice
The purpose of this Notice is to require NHS England & Improvement to process - as
defined in Regulation 3(2) (including dissemination to organisations permitted to
process confidential patient information under Regulation 3(3) of COPI) - confidential
patient information for the purposes set out in Regulation 3(1) of COPI to support the
Secretary of State’s response to Covid-19 (Covid-19 Purpose).
I consider this Notice is necessary to ensure that NHS England & Improvement will
lawfully and efficiently process confidential patient information.
2. Requirement to Process Confidential Patient Information
2
2.1. I hereby provide NHS England & Improvement with notice under Regulation
3(4) that, for the purposes set out above, I require NHS England &
Improvement to process confidential patient information.
2.2. NHS England & Improvement is only required to process such confidential
patient information where it is:
2.2.1. requested to do so by an authorised officer of the Department of
Health and Social Care acting on my behalf or requested to do so by
another organisation permitted to process confidential information
under Regulation 3(3) of COPI (the Requestor), and
2.2.2. The confidential patient information is required to be processed for a
Covid-19 Purpose and will be processed solely for that Covid-19
Purpose and in accordance with the restrictions set out in Regulation
7 of COPI; and
2.2.3. from the date of this notice for the period up to 30 September 2020.
3. Notification when disseminating confidential patient information
NHS England & Improvement is requested when disseminating confidential patient
information under this Notice to remind recipients of confidential patient information of
their responsibilities under COPI when processing the confidential patient information,
including the restrictions which apply to their processing of it under Regulation 7 of
COPI.
4. Recording of processing
A record should be kept of all data processed under this notice.
5. Review and Expiry of this Notice
This Notice will be reviewed on or before 30 September 2020 and may be extended
by me by further notice in writing for the period specified in that notice. If no further
notice is sent to you by me, this Notice will expire on 30 September 2020.
I am grateful for your continued support at this critical time for the nation.
Yours sincerely
On behalf of
Secretary of State for Health and Social Care
