Revised on 26-02-2020
Government of India
Ministry of Health & FW
Consolidated Travel advisory in view of COVID-19
In view of the spurt of cases being reported from China and other countries, travelers are advised
the following:
 Indian citizens are advised to refrain from travel to China. People travelling to China
henceforth will be quarantined on return.
 Those planning a visit to India from China:
o Existing visas (including eVisa already issued) are no longer valid for any foreign
national travelling from China.
o Intending visitors may contact Embassy in Beijing (visa.beijing@mea.gov.in) or
the Consulates in Shanghai (ccons.shanghai@mea.gov.in) and Guangzhou
(visa.guangzhou@mea.gov.in) to apply afresh for an Indian visa.
o The Indian Embassy in China continues to remain contactable 24x7 on two hotline
numbers +8618610952903 & +8618612083629 and the dedicated email
helpdesk.beijing@mea.gov.in. Indian nationals in need of any assistance may get
in touch with the Embassy on these hotlines and email.
 Indian citizens are further advised to refrain from non-essential travel to the following
countries:
o Singapore
o Republic of Korea
o Islamic Republic of Iran
o Italy
 People coming from Republic of Korea, Iran and Italy or those having history of travel to
these countries may be quarantined for 14 days on arrival to India
 For any queries related to health, people may contact on Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare 24*7 helpline number (+91-11-23978046) or email at (ncov2019@gmail.com)
 Those having compelling reasons to travel to these countries should follow these simple public
health measures at all times as under:
o Observe good personal hygiene.
o Practice frequent hand washing with soap.
o Follow respiratory etiquettes - cover your mouth when coughing or sneezing.
o Avoid close contact with people who are unwell or showing symptoms of illness,
such as cough, runny nose etc.
o Avoid contact with live animals and consumption of raw/undercooked meats.
o Avoid travel to farms, live animal markets or where animals are slaughtered.
o Wear a mask if you have respiratory symptoms such as cough or runny nose.
 If you feel sick on flight, while traveling back to India:
o Inform the airlines crew about illness.
o Seek mask and the self-reporting format from the airline crew.
o Avoid close contact with family members or fellow travelers.
o Follow the directions of airline crew while disembarking.
o Immediately report facts to the Airport Health Office/Immigration Office and
Helpline number (011-23978046) also.
o Follow the direction of the airport health officer or as issued by the helpline.
 If you feel sick within a span of 28 days after return from COVID-19 affected areas:
o Immediately call the Helpline number (011-23978046) and follow the direction
issued.
o Maintain effective self-isolation at home and with others.
o Observe good personal hygiene.
o Practice frequent hand washing with soap.
o Follow respiratory etiquettes - cover your mouth when coughing or sneezing.
o Report the illness to the nearest health facility and also inform the treating doctor
regarding your travel history.
