39 Victoria Street
London
SW1H 0EU
To:
Organisations providing health services
General Practices
Local Authorities
Arm’s Length Bodies of the Department of Health and Social Care
20 March 2020
Dear All,
Covid-19 – Notice under Regulation 3(4) of the Health Service Control of
Patient Information Regulations 2002
The health and social care system is taking action to manage and mitigate the spread
and impact of the current outbreak of Covid-19. Action to be taken will require the
processing and sharing of confidential patient information amongst health
organisations and other bodies engaged in disease surveillance for the purposes of
research, protecting public health, providing healthcare services to the public and
monitoring and managing the Covid-19 outbreak and incidents of exposure.
I am therefore writing to inform you that I am serving notice under Regulation 3(4) of
the Health Service (Control of Patient Information) Regulations 2002 (COPI) to require
organisations to process confidential patient information in the manner set out below
for purposes set out in Regulation 3(1) of COPI.
This Notice does not apply to NHS Digital or NHS England & Improvement, which are
subject to separate notices under COPI.
1. Purpose of this Notice
The purpose of this Notice is to require organisations to process confidential patient
information for the purposes set out in Regulation 3(1) of COPI to support the
Secretary of State’s response to Covid-19 (Covid-19 Purpose). “Processing” for these
purposes is defined in Regulation 3(2) and includes dissemination of confidential
patient information to persons and organisations permitted to process confidential
patient information under Regulation 3(3) of COPI.
I consider this Notice is necessary to require organisations to lawfully and efficiently
process confidential patient information as set out in Regulation 3(2) of COPI for
purposes defined in regulation 3(1).
2. Requirement to Process Confidential Patient Information
2.1.I hereby provide recipients with notice under Regulation 3(4) that I require you to
process confidential patient information, including disseminating to a person or
organisation permitted to process confidential patient information, including
disseminating to a person or organisation permitted to process confidential patient
information under Regulation 3(3) of COPI.
2.2.Organisations are only required to process such confidential patient information:
2.2.1. where the confidential patient information to be processed is required for
a Covid-19 Purpose and will be processed solely for that Covid-19
Purpose in accordance with Regulation 7 of COPI; and
2.2.2. from the date of this Notice until 30th September 2020.
3. Covid-19 Purpose.
3.1 A Covid-19 Purpose includes but is not limited to the following:
● understanding Covid-19 and risks to public health, trends in Covid-19
and such risks, and controlling and preventing the spread of Covid-19
and such risks;
● identifying and understanding information about patients or potential
patients with or at risk of Covid-19, information about incidents of patient
exposure to Covid-19 and the management of patients with or at risk of
Covid-19 including: locating, contacting, screening, flagging and
monitoring such patients and collecting information about and providing
services in relation to testing, diagnosis, self-isolation, fitness to work,
treatment, medical and social interventions and recovery from Covid-19;
● understanding information about patient access to health services and
adult social care services and the need for wider care of patients and
vulnerable groups as a direct or indirect result of Covid-19 and the
availability and capacity of those services or that care;
● monitoring and managing the response to Covid-19 by health and social
care bodies and the Government including providing information to the
public about Covid-19 and its effectiveness and information about
capacity, medicines, equipment, supplies, services and the workforce
within the health services and adult social care services;
● delivering services to patients, clinicians, the health services and adult
social care services workforce and the public about and in connection
with Covid-19, including the provision of information, fit notes and the
provision of health care and adult social care services; and
● research and planning in relation to Covid-19.
4. Recording of processing
A record should be kept of all data processed under this Notice.
5. Review and Expiry of this Notice
This Notice will be reviewed on or before 30 September 2020 and may be extended
by me by further notice in writing for the period specified in that notice. If no further
notice is sent to you by me, this Notice will expire on 30 September 2020.
I am grateful for your continued support at this critical time for the nation.
Yours sincerely
On behalf of
Secretary of State for Health and Social Care
