1
Global updates
As of 27 February 2020 (new cases in last 24 hours):
• Global: 82 294 confirmed cases (1 185 new)
• China: 78 630 confirmed (439 new), 2 747 deaths (29 new)
• Outside China: 3 664 confirmed (746 new), 46 countries (9 new), 57 deaths (13 new)
• Nine new countries are Brazil, Denmark, Estonia, Georgia, Greece, Norway, Pakistan,
Romania, and North Macedonia
WHO Risk Assessment: China – Very High, Regional Level – High, Global level – High
India Situation
The three cases of COVID-19 reported from Kerala have fully recovered and been discharged from the
hospital on 20 February 2020. Since then, no new cases have been reported.
The Prime Minister's Office, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) and Cabinet Secretary
are closely monitoring the situation of COVID-19 in India. Government of India (GoI) previously issued
travel advisories requesting the public to refrain from travelling to China, and from 26 February this
advisory applies also to Iran, Italy and Republic of Korea. People coming from these countries or having
travel history, since 10th
February 2020, may be quarantined for 14 days on their arrival to India.
On 22 February, GoI informed that universal screening at airports will also apply for flights arriving from
Indonesia, Kathmandu, Malaysia and Vietnam (in addition to China, Hongkong, Japan, Republic of
Korea, Singapore and Thailand as being done previously). As on date, a total of 4 82 927 passengers
have been screened from 4 787 flights. Screening is ongoing at 21 airports, 12 major seaports, and 65
minor seaports and land crossings particularly bordering Nepal. A total of 23 531 passengers are being
monitored under community surveillance through Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP)
network on a daily basis.
Between 26-27 February, GoI evacuated 124 people from Japan including 119 Indian citizens and five
nationals from Sri Lanka, Nepal, South Africa and Peru. They were quarantined on the Diamond
2
Princess Cruise ship at Yokohama due to COVID-19. In addition, 112 persons had been evacuated
from Wuhan, China. These included 76 Indian citizens and 36 nationals from countries such as
Bangladesh, Myanmar, Maldives, China, South Africa, USA and Madagascar. These evacuees have
been quarantined for 14 days at camps managed by the Army and ITBP
The National Institute of Virology, Pune under the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has
informed that a total of 2 880 samples have been tested as on 27 February 2020. 1 572 samples were
referred from suspected cases throughout the country except those from the quarantine centres. Till
date, three out of the 1 572 have been tested positive for COVID-19.
Situation in Kerala
In Kerala, the situation has stabilized with no new case being detected. Contact tracing, isolation and
response activities have been scaled down. State has closed control room activities and handed over
surveillance and response to IDSP as a mark of normalcy.
Extensive awareness and communication activities continue as before to build awareness and sensitize
the public. In last two days, Kerala has released more people from isolation reducing the total people in
isolation to just 127 out of which 5 are in hospital. Of the total 444 samples sent for testing 3 were
positive, 436 were negative and results for 5 are pending.
WHO Response
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) support at national level
WCO is closely working with National Centre for Diseases Control (NCDC) on disease surveillance,
with the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) on laboratory testing capacity, and the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting on risk communications.
As member of the Joint Monitoring Group (JMG) on emerging diseases, WCO has been regularly
attending these meetings (25 and 27 February). JMG brings together line ministries and agencies to
provide updates as well technical guidance on preparedness and response activities including planning
for the next phase and securing essential supplies (PPE).
3
WCO continues to provide support to ICMR on laboratory and research protocols and National AIDS
Control Organization (NACO) for repurposing of Antiviral drugs for COVID-19. WCO has also initiated
exchange of information with ICMR on areas of research and development related to COVID-19.
WHO coordination with UN partners
WCO India and UNICEF are supporting MoHFW for preparedness, response planning including
interventions for risk communication and community engagement, development of IEC materials and
their dissemination among public through various communication channels. The field offices of UNICEF
have been coordinating with State governments to plan their support in case COVID-19 situation
escalates.
WCO India has been updating the UN country team and health partners on COVID-19 situation with
daily information package and frequent meetings.
WCO support at state level
WCO field teams continue to support the states across India in various preparedness and response
activities. These include screening of travelers at points of entry, supporting contact tracing and follow
up of travelers, developing and adapting technical guidance and IEC materials, facilitating mock drills,
orienting and advocating to state officials, training rapid response teams and medical officers, sharing
technical materials and daily situation update.
For more information contact:
Dr Tran Minh Nhu Nguyen Dr Ritu Chauhan
Team Lead National Programme Officer
WHO India WHO India
Email: tranminhn@who.int Email: chauhanr@who.int
