राजीव गौबा मंत्रिमंडल सचिव

WG आरत सरकार
Rajiv Gauba CABINET SECRETARY

CGVERNMENT OF INDIA,
ee

हा? >> Dated : 22.08.2020

०८ Chi, Cometooy

ho you ar sare, Covermentof ina in oortnation vith Sat Governments
nas tai averse oenage and ante preed& Coronas COD.
Tee nave Ben len base on te eerie global and coment soon
eaten of prea! er COMIDCTDwonsed Hanes caren an gen eos
Quen’ by trinenl doce ane sours, These hele, ira, resecbone en
कट ave moe na ae a ip tating abe trou he
negra trait ee sou कस सवा ane erate Tl
Sadening an शक दबा Boning socal detarag ba oming uted
due mins rogard oe

2, You will appreciate that there is a need to take further pre-emptive actions te
Contain the spiead of COVID-T9 given that there has been a sharp increase in the
number of confirmed cases, This was highlightee in the meating with all Chief
Secrotarios and Secretaries of Government af India held today. The urgent need for
efiecive and immediate interventions was discussed, It was noted that many Stale
Governments have proactively taken various steps including imposition of stiingent
restrictions under Epidemic Diseases Act, 4897 and regulations frarned under it to
curb non-essential mevernent, prevent gathering of psople and promote social
distancing

3... As resalvad in today's meeting, itis expected that the States would take all
noveesary pre-emptive actions to contain the spread of COVID-t9 by using the
available legal provisions. especially in those districts and regions where confirmed
cases have been repertad or whers a large number of people are under surveillance
dus to risk of infection. Hare, the fcous should be on closure of all acivitiss except
essential services such as hospitals, telecom, medicine shops, provision stores, ete.
Establshmontsfactories engaged in manufacturing and distribution of essential
commodities like medicines, sanitizers, masks, etc, should be exempt from these
restrictions. All efforts should be made ta prevant unnecessary travel. Transport
services may operate at mere skeletal level, Raliway Board and Ministry of Housing
and Urban Affairs have already announced suspension of train services including sub-
urban rails and metro services tl March 3° 2020. Goods trains may continue to
eperete for faciltating availabilty of essential commodities,

4, The call given by the Hor’ble Prine Minister for Janata Curfew on March 22°
has evoked spontaneous and widespread response. States may ensure that when
‘ne deadine for Janata Curfew ends at 9 PM today evening, there is no large scale
movernent or assembly of people. Suitable restictians under Section (44 ० छा.१06
may therefore be putin place. The momentum created by Janata Curfew needs to be
built upon

 

 

‘Cabin Seortrt attapa As, Nae Pel 60D
“Fe OUL-280NG, SHI Fae O-U-2IGIRAE cae gi
5... Youmay also request indusiries, establishments etc. to allow their employees
‘to work from home and provide remuneration to them during this period. In respect of
the poor and vulnerable sections, including casual labour, daily wage workers, otc,
proactive measures may be taken to mitigate any hardships that may be caused.

6, You ate also requestad to assess the avsitabilly of medical services inoluding
‘guarantine and isolation facilities and scale them up to mest all possible contingericies.
Efforts may be made to identify and designate hospitale only for GOVID-I8,
management. Adequate testing facilities are being created and private laboratories
have also baan permitted to carry out necessary tests,

7. _L appreciate your whole hearted support in tackling this unprecedented

situation
hank apts

‘Yours shroarly
ave
he alba,

न,

As per lst attached
