8
March 22, 2020
HIGHLIGHTS
• 23 states/UTs including New Delhi have issued orders allowing only
SITUATION IN
essential services to operate in 75 districts with confirmed COVID-19
NUMBERS
cases until 31 March 2020. The focus is on closure of all activities except
India
essential services such as hospitals, telecom, pharmacy, provision
360 Confirmed
stores.
7 Deaths
• PM Modi called for 'Janata curfew' on 22 March from 7 AM-9 PM, urging
23 States/UTs
people to stay home except those in essential services, enforcing publicSouth-East Asia
led social distancing interventions.
979 confirmed
• In consultation with medical professionals, detailed advisory has been
38 deaths
issued for all health establishments to avoid non-urgent hospitalization
and minimize elective surgeries.
Globally
• Allaying concern of the logistics for COVID-19 management particularly
266 073 confirmed
masks and hand sanitizers, Government has notified an Order under the
11 184 deaths
Essential Commodities (ECs) Act, 1955 to declare these items as
Essential Commodities up to 30 June.
WHO RISK
• No scheduled international commercial passenger aircraft shall take off
ASSESSMENT
from any foreign airport for any airport in India, after 0001 hrs GMT of 22
Globally - Very High
March 2020 till 0001 hrs GMT of 29 March 2020.
• All train services suspended till 31st March 2020 including sub urban rail
services, metro rail services and interstate passenger transport. Good trains may continue to
operate for facilitating availability of essential commodities.
• These restrictions are temporary but considered critical to break the chain of transmission.
States have been requested to ensure that while such measures are being taken, necessary
steps must be ensured to minimize discomfort to the poor and vulnerable sections of the
society.
INDIA SITUATION
As on 22 March 2020 06.30 PM, a total of 360 COVID-19 cases (319 Indian Nationals and 41 Foreign
Nationals) have been reported from 23 States/UTs across India.
Cases:
Maharashtra (67) Kerala (52) Delhi (29) Uttar Pradesh (27) Karnataka (26) Rajasthan (24) Telangana
(22) Haryana (21) Punjab (21) Gujarat (18) Ladakh (13) Andhra Pradesh (5) Chandigarh (5) Jammu &
Kashmir (4) Madhya Pradesh (4) Tamil Nadu (7) West Bengal (4) Uttarakhand (3) Bihar (2) Himachal
Pradesh (2) Odisha (2) Chhattisgarh (1) Puducherry (1)
Deaths:
Maharashtra (2) Delhi (1) Bihar (1), Gujarat (1), Karnataka (1) Punjab (1)

Page 1 of 6

8
March 22, 2020

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE
Hon’ble PM Narendra Modi made a public appeal to encourage public participation in the response
towards COVID-19 by observing a ‘Janata curfew’ on 22 March from 7 AM-9 PM. At 5 PM, all citizens
have been asked to participate in showing solidarity and appreciation for health workers by clapping. All
states have issued appropriate instructions for all children below 10 years of age and all citizens above
65 years (except for public representatives/government servants/medical professionals) to remain at
home and avoid mass gatherings, unless there is a medical reason and essential services requirement.
States have activated necessary provision for infectious disease management as provided under
Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897. Furthermore, under the Disaster Management Act, the States/UTs can
now draw funds from the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF), in addition to the funds from the state
government and the NHM. Ministry of Home Affairs has issued detailed guidelines to States/UTs in this
regard. To ensure effective and seamless coordination between the Centre and the States, 30 nodal
officers of the level of Joint Secretary and above have been drawn from various Ministries to liaison,
coordinate and help the States with respect to anything that is required from the Government of India.
High level Group of Ministers (GoM) is constantly reviewing the status of cases in India and
implementing steps taken by the Government of India across states. A detailed advisory on social
distancing measures has been issued to stop or slow down the rate and extent of disease transmission.
In consultation with professional associations, detailed advisory has been issued for all health
Page 2 of 6

8
March 22, 2020
institutions to avoid non-urgent hospitalization and minimalize elective surgeries. This is to avoid
hospital related infections to the vulnerable and prepare hospitals effectively for meeting current and
future challenges posed by COVID-19.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) is regularly evaluating quarantine facilities and
preparedness regarding hospital management such as OPD blocks, availability of testing kits, personal
protective equipment (PPEs), medicines, and adequate isolation wards. All public hospitals have been
directed to ensure adequate availability of protective gear for all healthcare workers.
Ministry of Pharma and Consumer Affairs has issued advisory to take necessary action to regulate
price for masks, sanitizers, and other health related logistic material and to facilitate their availability in
all hospitals and to people at large. Youth and citizens are urged to become volunteers to support the
government’s ongoing efforts in management of COVID-19. Advisory has also been issued by the
Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) citing preventive measures to be taken by all employees
of Ministries/ Departments to control the spread of COVID-19.
It is obligatory for all hospitals (Government and Private), Medical officers in Government health
institutions and registered Private Medical Practitioners including AYUSH Practitioners, to now notify
COVID-19 affected person (as defined by MoHFW) to concerned district surveillance unit. All
practitioners have been advised get the self-declaration forms (from MoHFW) who, within their
knowledge, have patients with travel history of COVID-19 affected countries as per the guidelines
and/or fall under the case definition of COVID-19 (suspect/case).

WHO GLOBAL UPDATE
• The United Nations Foundation and the Swiss Philanthropy Foundation have created the
solidarity fund to support WHO and partners in a massive effort to help countries prevent,
detect, and manage the novel coronavirus – particularly those where the needs are the greatest.
• The first vaccine trial has begun just 60 days after the genetic sequence of the virus was shared
by China. WHO and its partners are organizing a large international study, called the Solidarity
Trial, in many countries to compare different treatments.
• WHO and Global Citizen launched #TogetherAtHome, a virtual, no-contact concert series to
promote physical distancing and action for global health.
WHO COUNTRY SUPPORT
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) has been working closely with MoHFW, on preparedness and
response measures for COVID-19, including disease surveillance, laboratory and research protocols,
risk communications, training on infection prevention and control (IPC) and cluster containment plan,
surveillance and tracking of travelers.

Page 3 of 6

8
March 22, 2020
Co-ordination and Partnership
WHO has initiated dialogue with FICCI regarding aspects for engagement of the private sector for
COVID-19 response as representatives of India's business and industry. WHO together with UNICEF is
supporting MoHFW in crafting evidence-based multi-media communication campaigns that would focus
on different aspects such as preventive measures, busting myths, equipping the masses with
information on guidelines, advisories, testing labs, etc.
State Level Response
• Trainings on COVID-19 conducted in more than 564 districts and ongoing in remaining districts.
• State Rapid Response team activated in 33 states and Epidemic act enforced in 31 states.
• Closure of educational institutes/ cinema halls initiated in 35 states.
• Designated hospitals identified in 35 states.
• Restrictions for mass gatherings enforced in 33 states.
• Mock drill conducted in 10 states (Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Odisha, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand)
• Mass quarantine facilities identified in 25 states.
• In Uttar Pradesh, 2463 suspects are under surveillance– 2410 at home quarantine and 53 in
institutional isolation
• No cases have been reported from any of the 7 North Easter states. In Assam Health Minister
reviewed the preparedness at Guwahati Airport. Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland have
enforced the Epidemic Act in their states.
• Odisha Government is ready with 540 bed isolation bed across the state. The state
has released an advisory to all religious institutions to manage religious congregations
• In response to the first case, Chhattisgarh Chief Minister reviewed the district preparedness with
all District collectors and Superintendent of Police and Health minister chaired the core group
meeting with concerned departments.
• Helpline number for COVID-19 activated in all states
Risk Communication
To increase access to reliable information, WHO has partnered with WhatsApp and Facebook to launch
a WHO Health Alert messaging service. This service will provide the latest news and information on
COVID-19, including details on symptoms and how people can protect themselves.
ICMR COVID-19 testing strategy
WHO is working with ICMR to ensure country-appropriate testing strategy is in place without burdening
the health system. As per the latest ICMR guidance laboratory testing will be offered when prescribed
by a qualified physician (when advised as per the guidance issued). The strategy is reviewed by a
National Task Force and updated periodically. The latest revised strategy was issued on 20 March
2020. In addition, the network of labs equipped to test COVID-19 have been expanded to over 100, in
total.
Page 4 of 6

8
March 22, 2020

States are assessing the availability of medical services including testing, quarantine and measures
needed scale them up to meet all possible contingencies. States have been advised to earmark
facilities fully dedicated to managing the COVID-19 cases only. Currently, there is no evidence of
community transmission of COVID-19 and the disease is primarily reported in individuals with travel
history to the affected countries or close contacts of positive cases. Hence the ICMR strategy
recommends the following testing protocols: 1. Caution:
• All asymptomatic individuals who have undertaken international travel in the last 14
days: - They should stay in home quarantine for 14 days and tested only if they
become symptomatic (fever, cough, difficulty in breathing).
• All family members living with a confirmed case should be home quarantined
2. Whom to test:
• All symptomatic contacts of laboratory confirmed cases
• All symptomatic health care workers.
• All hospitalized patients with Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (fever AND cough
and/or shortness of breath).
• Asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case should be tested
once between day 5 and day 14 of coming in his/her contact.
• Direct and high-risk contact include those who live in the same household with a
confirmed case and healthcare workers who examined a confirmed case without
adequate protection as per WHO recommendations.
3. What samples to collect: oropharyngeal and/or nasopharyngeal swabs
Guidelines Issued
1. Guidelines on Clinical Management of COVID-19 triage (early recognition of patients),
implementation of IPC measures has been revised and updated.
2. Guidelines for Dead Body Management towards standard precautions, infection prevention and
control measures, handling of the body and environmental disinfection.
3. India has revised IPC Guidelines for COVID-19 dated 9 March 2020.
4. Guidelines have also been issued for Private Sector Laboratories Intending to Initiate COVID-19
Testing including Sample Collection, Packaging and Transportation for Novel Coronavirus
5. COVID-19 resources online training course are now available in the official WHO languages on
OpenWHO - an interactive, web-based, knowledge-transfer platform offering free online courses
to improve the response to health emergencies. Resources under development include courses
in Hindi as well.

Page 5 of 6

8
March 22, 2020

TRAVEL ADVISORY
As per GoM aligned with steps taken by the Government of India, so far including travel restrictions and
advisories already in place, new restrictions in place include: • No scheduled international commercial passenger aircraft shall take off from any foreign airport
for any airport in India, after 0001 hrs GMT of March 22, 2020 till 0001 hrs GMT of March 29,
2020. Only maximum travel time of 20 hours is permissible for commercial passenger aircraft to
land in India.
• As such, no incoming scheduled international commercial passenger aircraft shall be allowed to
disembark its passengers *on Indian soil* (Foreigner or Indian) after 2001 hrs GMT of March 22,
2020 (*i.e. 0131 hrs IST of March 23, 2020).
• It is to be highlighted that these are temporary measures to restrict the spread of COVID-19 and
will be reviewed by the Government.
All international passengers entering India are required to furnish duly filled self-declaration form to
Health Officials and Immigration officials and undergo Universal Health Screening at the designated
health counters at all Points of Entry.
Instructions have been issued to all major and minor shipping ports for dealing with novel coronavirus.
The format of the Maritime Declaration of Health is as per the International Health Regulations 2005,
issued by World Health Organization which has also been adopted by International Maritime
Organization.
All train services suspended till 31st March 2020 including sub urban rail services and metro rail
services. Good trains may continue to operate for facilitating availability of essential commodities.
Interstate passenger transport also to be suspended till 31st Mar 2020. All travel restrictions are
temporary but considered critical to break the chain of transmission.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
For any queries related to health, people may contact Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 24*7 helpline
number (+91-11-23978046) or email at (ncov2019@gmail.com).
FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT:
Dr Tran Minh Nhu Nguyen
Team Lead
WHO India Email: tranminhn@who.int

Page 6 of 6

Dr Ritu Chauhan
National Programme Officer
WHO India Email: chauhanr@who.int

