N E W S
UAE announces recovery of three people, 72 new COVID-19 cases
27 Mar, 2020: The UAE announced on Friday the detection of 72 new coronavirus, COVID-19, cases and the recovery of
three more individuals.
The Ministry of Health and Prevention, MoHAP, said the new cases consisted of people who arrived from abroad or came
in contact with previously confirmed cases under quarantine. Some cases were due to travel abroad.
The new cases bring the total number of confirmed cases in the country to 405, the ministry said.
In a statement, MoHAP added the new cases belonged to various nationalities - one each from Sri Lanka, Jordan,
Palestine, Syria, Iran, Comoros, China, Saudi Arabia, Kyrgyzstan, Bosnia, Serbia, Greece, Uruguay, Romania, Sweden, South
Africa, Iraq and Yemen, two each from Nepal, and Ethiopia, four from the UAE, five each from Britain, Pakistan and
Lebanon, eight from Bangladesh, and 23 cases from India.
''All patients are in stable condition and receiving necessary medical care, the ministry affirmed.
MoHAP also announced the full recovery of three cases - two Bangladeshis and a Pakistani - taking the total number of
recoveries so far to 55.
The Ministry advised the general public to adhere to preventative health and personal hygiene measures to prevent the
spread of the epidemic.
It stressed basic protective measures such as the frequent washing of hands; covering mouth and nose with flexed elbow
or tissue while coughing and sneezing and discarding of the tissue immediately.
The Ministry called upon the public to adhere to preventive measures, follow news updates on the health developments
from the official government sources and disregard rumours and not circulate them.
It also called upon individuals suffering from respiratory ailments to avoid crowded places.
"Estijaba" service at the operation center –
Department of Health at: 800-1717
|
Ministry of Health & Prevention at:800-11111
|
Dubai Health Authority at:800-
342
}
Privacy
Policy
Terms &
Conditions
© 2020 Department of Health Abu Dhabi. All rights reserved.
