<The routes of transmission>
The routes of transmission are generally through droplets and contacts. It is not
thought to be caused by airborne infections.
In addition, under certain circumstances, such as when talking to many people at
a short distance in confined spaces, there is the risk of spreading the infection
even without coughing or sneezing.
Prevention Measures against
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
< Common symptoms and risk of developing severe>
Often, fevers or respiratory symptoms may persist for around one week,
and many patients complain of strong fatigue.
• First of all, washing hand is important. Wash your hands frequently with soap
or alcohol when you return home, before or after cooking, before eating, etc.
• When you have symptoms such as coughs and sneezes, please cover your
mouth and nose. If you cover coughs and sneezes with your hands and touches
objects around you with those hands, there is a chance of spreading virus via
those objects, please observe the ”coughing etiquette”.
• Seniors and persons with chronic diseases are advised to take extra
precaution and avoid visiting packed places and using public transportation
as much as possible.
About COVID-19
Precautions in daily life
Those infected often present only mild symptoms, which will heal in many cases.
The severity of the novel coronavirus disease is not as great as infectious diseases
with extremely high mortality rates, but it does have the higher risk than seasonal
influenza. The risks of developing severe symptoms are particularly high
among the elderly and patients with underlying diseases.
Do not go to office or school, especially if you have symptoms such as fever.
If you have cold symptoms such as fever, measure and record fever everyday.
Be careful if you have following symptoms
If you have any of the following symptoms, please consult with the consultation center
for people with potential exposure to COVID-19:
- You have had cold symptoms or a fever of 37.5°C or over for four days
or more.
(including when you need to continue to take an antipyretic)
- You have a strong feeling of weariness (fatigue) or shortness of breath
(difficulty breathing).
February 25, 2020 version
https://www.mhlw.go.jp/stf/seisakunitsuite/bunya/
kenkou_iryou/covid19-kikokusyasessyokusya.html
If the consultation center suspects that you have been infected with the virus, it will
introduce you to a medical institution where medical services for people with potential
exposure to COVID-19 are available. Please visit the medical institution, wearing a
facemask, and refrain from using public transportation.
The consultation centers for people with potential exposure to COVID-19 are set up in
each prefecture.
For further information, please refer to the following URL or QR cord.(in Japanese)
* Please also consult with the consultation center if you are a senior
citizen or have an underlying disease, and you have had the symptoms
mentioned above for about two days.
Be careful if you have following symptoms
Medical institutions offering assistance in
foreign languages
You can find the medical institutions offering assistance in foreign languages on the
following website.
https://www.jnto.go.jp/emergency/jpn/mi_guide.html
