Dinesh Adhikari No 4/Comra/Bol/2020- &
Deputy Cirector BUREAU OF IMMIGRATION
(Ministry of Home Affairs)
Government cf india

New Delhi, the March 4, 2020
Subject : Visa rest

 

ctions related to COVID-t9

 

Folowing instructions have been ssued by Bol in pursuance of the
meeting of GOM on March 4, 2020.

2 owt Supersession of all earier advisories Issued on this subject, the
folloving vise restrict ons are issued ‘or implementation

All existing visas issued to nationals of any country except those
issued to Diplomats, Officials, UN / International organizations,
Eipeloymer Project visas stand suspended til April 5, 200 This
yalcorre into effect from 4200 GMT on Marchi 43, 2020 at the aor
departure 0 any foreigner for onward journey to india

Vises of all foreigners already in India remain valid They may contact
the nearest FRROIFRO through e-FRRO module ior extension/
Froese ecto 2 their visa or grant ot any consuiar service if they
choose to do so

 

Usa free travel faciity granted o OCI sara holders shall be kept in
abeyance til April 45, 2020. This will come into effect from 4200
GMT on March 3, 2020 at the port of departure of any foreigner for
onward journey to India,

'v. Any foreign national who intends to travel to India for compelling
‘easons may cortact the neareet Indian Mission for fresh vies

\- Al incoming travellers, including Indian nationals, arriving from any
destination and having visited China, Italy. an Republic of Korea,
France, Spain and Germany on or after’ Feb I6" 2090 shall be
vi. International trafic through land vorcers will b2 restrictec to
designated Immigration Checkpests with robust medical screeing
facilities, These will be notified separately by Ministry of Home
Affairs.

2. _Inadcition to the above visa ‘esticticns the following travel advisory
is hereby issued in accordance with instructiors of Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare

i Indian natonals presently abroad are advised to avoid non-essential
travel. They are hereby informed that they can be quarantined for a
minimum period of 4 days on ther arrival in India

ii All Ingian nationals are strongly advsed to avoid all non-essential
travel abroad. On their return they can be subjected to quarantine for
a minimum period of 44 days.

Yours (Wintel,

4

(Dinesh Adhikar
To

Shri Anil Malik
Additionel SecretaryiF
MHA, New Delhi

Shri Lav Aggarwal
Joint Secretary

‘Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
New Delhi

Shri Pankaj Agarwal
Joint Secra
Cabinet Secretariat

 
Rashtrapati Bhawan, New Delhi

Shri Adarsh Swaika
Joint SecretaryiCPV
Ministry of External Affairs
New Deini

‘Shri Yogendra Tripathi
Secretary

Ministry of Tourism

New Dethi

All Chief Secretaries of States

All Health Secretaries of States
