Revision of Basic Policies for Novel Coronavirus Disease Control (Summary)
・ On April 7, 2020, a state of emergency was declared in view of the risk that nationwide and rapid spread of
the Novel Coronavirus could have an enormous impact on people's lives and the national economy.
・ Scope: 7 prefectures (Saitama, Chiba, Tokyo, Kanagawa, Osaka, Hyogo and Fukuoka), for a period of one
month (from 7 April to 6 May)
・ It is expected to be possible to contain the infection by thoroughly reducing contact between people
including self-restraint of non-essential going out.
・ Even under the state of emergency, the impact on social and economic functions should be minimized, and
measures such as "lockdown" (city blockade) will not be taken.
1 Facts on current situation of the novel coronavirus infectious disease
- Cases with unknown routes of transmission and cases entering from overseas have increased, which causes the risk of
infection in daily life. Domestic medical system is strained.
- In addition to “3Cs", crowded places and close-distance conversations can be risk factors. Major sources of infection could
include clusters in live houses, fitness gyms, medical institutions, eateries with hospitality services in downtown areas, etc.
2 Overall Policies for Novel Coronavirus Disease Control
- Work to contain clusters and reduce contact between people in each area in order to slow the spread of infection.
- Take every possible measure to minimize severe cases and death through surveillance and Information gathering, and
provision of appropriate medical care.
- Minimize the impact on social and economic functions
3 Key points in implementing measures against novel coronavirus disease
(1) Provision and sharing of Information: ensuring thorough communication based on the local situation including through SNS.
(2) Surveillance and Information gathering: grasping the total number of infected cases, strengthening inspection system, etc.
(3) Pandemic Prevention: reducing contact including through legally-based request on self-restraint of going out
(4) Medical Care: securing a flexible medical provision system in each region, etc.
(5) Economy and employment: responding flexibly to changes of situation, preventing thoroughly infection at medical institutions
(6) Others: consideration for human rights, provision of goods and materials, cooperation among relevant agencies,
maintenance of social functions, monitoring the situation after the emergency declaration
