Preliminary Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
India COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems
Preparedness Project (P173836)
March 27, 2020
March 27, 2020
1. Introduction/Project Description
A new respiratory infectious disease, COVID-19, caused by a new coronavirus called SARS-CoV-2, emerged in early
December 2019. Since then, the virus has spread to India and 106 other countries in Asia, Europe, North America,
Africa, and Oceania. On March 11, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the outbreak a pandemic, which
has since rapidly evolved. As an economic hub with substantial global connectivity and movement of people and
goods, India is directly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Although it is too early to gauge the full spectrum of
the outbreak’s social and economic impacts, COVID-19 has already caused lockdowns in China, Korea, and in many
countries in Europe, and in some states of India, suspension of schools and universities, disruption of food systems
and other supply chains, as well as a slowdown in trade between India and rest of the world.
As part of the Fast Track COVID-19 Response Program
1
, the proposed India COVID-19 Emergency Response and
Health Systems Preparedness Project is a four-year project with US$1 billion from the World Bank’s COVID19
Fast-Track Facility. The priority areas identified under the project is to build on the GOI’s response to date and are
informed by international best practice and WHO’s Guidance Note on COVID-19 emergency response; (ii) The
GOI’s Draft COVID-19 Containment Plan; WHO COVID-19 Country Preparedness & Response Note (February 2019);
World Bank Fast Track COVID-19 Facility Board Paper; Best Practices from China (Policy Notes on Lessons Learned
from SARS and Other Outbreaks); and summary of Core Lessons from Bank Health Emergency Operations.
The proposed India COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness Projectaims to respond to
and mitigate the COVID-19s threat and strengthen national systems for public health preparedness in India. The
key project indicators include (1) Proportion of laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19 responded to within 48
hours; (2) Proportion of specimens submitted for SARS-COV-2 laboratory testing confirmed within WHO-stipulated
standard time; and (3) Proportion of population able to identify three key symptoms of COVID-19 and/or seasonal
influenza and three personal prevention measures (as assessed by a representative population survey).The project
comprises the following components:
Component 1: Emergency COVID-19 Response: The aim of this component is to slow down and limit as much as
possible the spread of COVID-19 in the country. This will be achieved through providing immediate support to
enhance disease detection capacities through increasing surveillance capacities, port health screening, provision
of technical expertise, strengthening laboratory and diagnostic systems to ensure prompt case finding and local
containment. Enhanced detection capacities will be supported through updated training to existing surveillance
workers, improving reporting by frontline health workers using existing surveillance information and, where
possible, contact tracing of known cases. Laboratory capacity to diagnose both human and animal health
potential diseases at national and provincial level will be strengthened; standardized sample collection,
channeling and transportation will be established; the sites in need for introduction of point of care diagnostics
will be determined; and engage private laboratories to expand capacity to test and manage COVID-19 will be
engaged. Isolation wards and infection prevention and control activities will be scaledup, particularly in district
hospitals and designated infectious disease hospitals. Given the limited public sector capacity for isolation and
intensive care services for COVID-19, the private sector will be contracted to surge India’s capacity for diagnostic
and intensive care treatment services for the disease. This will be critical in the event of an escalation in the
pandemic. The component will support the MOHFW to collaborate with and engage the PM-JAY to pilot private
sector engagement for COVID-19 in patient care services. Interventions that have proven effective in the
containment of COVID-19 such as social distancing will be supported under the leadership of states.
1
A globally coordinated, country-based response to support health systems and emergency response capacity in developing
countries, focused largely on health system response, complemented by support for economic and social disruption.
2
Component 2: Strengthening National and State Health Systems to Support Prevention and Preparedness: The
component will support GOI to build resilient health systems to provide core public health, prevention and patient
management functions to manage COVID-19 and future disease outbreaks. Key activities include: (i) Revamping
hospitals for air borne infection control; (ii) Revamp of Infectious Disease Hospitals and Districts Hospitals with
single occupancy air borne infection isolation rooms (also called negative-pressure isolation rooms) to prevent
spread of infection from and between patients; (iii) Building or upgrading laboratory testing systems through
building network of Biosafety Level 3, high containment laboratories with high biosafety standards in the country
to meet the requirements of testing for COVID-19, future pandemics or bioterrorism attacks; (iv) Expanding point-
of-care molecular testing for viral disease in sub-district and district laboratories and sample transport
mechanisms; (iv) Improving disease surveillance systems and health information systems across the country by
strengthening the Integrated Disease Surveillance Program (IDSP) and integration of all health information; (v)
Surge in community-based disease surveillance capacity through increased personnel and use of ICT systems to
track and monitor infectious outbreaks; (vi) Developing human resources with core competencies in integrated
disease surveillance across different states and at the central level to track and monitor current and new
diseaseoutbreaks.
Public health workforce development will be supported to ensure that a complete spectrum of expertise is
covered, including epidemiologists, data managers, laboratory technicians, emergency management and risk
communications specialists, and public health managers.
Component 3: Strengthening Pandemic Research and Multi-sector,National Institutions and Platforms for One
Health: The component seeks to develop core capacity to deliver the “One Health”approach to monitor, detect
and manage infectious disease outbreaks in animals and in humans. The component will develop GOI capacity and
systems to treat disease threats linked to the animal-human interface. About 70% of new infectious diseases
begin with human-to-animal contact, including HIV/AIDS, Ebola and SARS. Key activities to be scaled-up in
collaboration with Department of Livestock and states include: (i) Needs assessment and upgrade of national
protocols and surveillance systems for animal and human health infections; (ii) Review and strengthen established
mechanisms for responding to priority existing and emerging zoonoses; (iii) Strengthen surveillance systems for
prioritized zoonoses diseases or pathogens of high national public health concern; (iv) Improve biosafety and
biosecurity management, including staff training and proper specimen transportation; and (v) Strengthen national
and state-level “One-Health” capacity of the animal health workforce, (e.g., veterinarians, entomologists,
paravents, semen station personnel, AI technicians, public sector and community based extension workers).
India is uniquely positioned to play a key role in research on viruses, other disease pathogens and vaccines for its
own emergency response and for global public goods. This component will support research on COVID-19 by
Indian institutions working in collaboration with the Indian Council for Medical Research. The component will
support biomedical research to generate evidence to inform the short-term and medium-term response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. In line with this, the component will build capacity for health systems research at central and
state levels to position India to better respond to pandemic outbreaks.
Component 4: Community Engagement and Risk Communication. This component will address significant
negative externalities expected in the event of a widespread COVID-19 outbreak and include comprehensive
communication strategies. The primary focus will be on addressing social distancing measures, such as avoiding
large social gatherings and should the need arise, school closings to mitigate against the possible negative impacts
on children’s learning and wellbeing. As part of the comprehensive communication and behavior change
interventions, a community campaign for schools and parents will be supported to provide information about how
to protect themselves and promote good hygiene practices. Investments will be made to have plans in place to
ensure the continuity of learning, including remote learning options such as radio broadcast and other means of
distance delivery of academic content in the areas of literature and mathematics. Should tertiary education
institutions also be closed, a pilot for teaching remotely and for maintaining operational continuity will be
financed to facilitate engagement of students. Additional preventive actions would be supported that would
complement social distancing such as personal hygiene promotion, including promoting handwashing and proper
3
cooking, and distribution and use of masks, along with increased awareness and promotion of community
participation in slowing the spread of the pandemic. This component will also include provision of mental health
and psychosocial services for vulnerable communities.
Component 5: Implementation Management and Monitoring and Evaluation
Support for the strengthening of public structures for the coordination and management of the project would be
provided, including MOHFW and state (decentralized) arrangements for coordination of activities, financial
management, procurement and monitoring and evaluation. This component would also strengthen National
Center for Disease Control (NCDC) capacity for health emergency and disease outbreak management capacity;
upgrade information systems for program management; and expand staffing with core competencies for disease
surveillance, epidemiology, labs and One Health service delivery. The project will leverage on appropriate
technology, artificial intelligence and big data analytics to improve the preparedness and response to the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic through the MOHFW’s disease surveillance platform.
Component 6: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC): In the event of an Eligible Crisis or
Emergency, the project will contribute to providing immediate and effective response to said crisis or
emergency.
The India COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness Projectis being prepared under the
World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF). As per the Environmental and Social Standard ESS 10
on“Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure”, the implementing agencies should provide stakeholders
with timely, relevant, understandable and accessible information, and consult with them in a culturally
appropriate manner, which is free of manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination and intimidation.
The overall objective of this preliminarySEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including public
information disclosure and consultation, throughout the entire project cycle. The SEP outlines the ways in which
the project team will communicate with stakeholders and includes a mechanism by which people can raise
concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project and any activities related to the project. The
involvement of the local population is essential to the success of the project in order to ensure smooth
collaboration between project staff and local communities and to minimize and mitigate environmental and social
risks related to the proposed project activities. In the context of infectious diseases, broad, culturally appropriate,
and adapted awareness raising activities are particularly important to properly sensitize the communities to the
risks related to infectious diseases.
2. Stakeholder identification and analysis
Project stakeholders are defined as individuals, groups or other entities who:
(i) are impacted or likely to be impacted directly or indirectly, positively or adversely, by the Project
(also known as “affected parties”); and
(ii) may have an interest in the Project (“interested parties”). They include individuals or groups whose
interests may be affected by the Project and who have the potential to influence the Project
outcomes in any way.
Cooperation and negotiation with the stakeholders throughout the project development phase often also require
the identification of persons who act as legitimate representatives of their respective stakeholder groups, i.e. the
individuals who have been entrusted by their fellow group members with advocating the groups’ interests in the
process of engagement with the Project. Community representatives may provide helpful insight into the local
settings and act as main conduits for dissemination of the Project-related information and as a primary
communication/liaison link between the Project and targeted communities and their established
networks.Verification of stakeholder representatives (i.e. the process of confirming that they are legitimate and
genuine advocates of the community they represent) remains an important task in establishing contact with the
community stakeholders. Legitimacy of the community representatives can be verified by talking informally to a
4
random sample of community members and heeding their views on who can be representing their interests in the
most effective way.
2.1 Methodology
In order to meet best practice approaches, the project will apply the following principles for stakeholder
engagement:
 Openness and life-cycle approach: public consultations for the project(s) will be arranged during the whole life-
cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation, interference, coercion or intimidation;
 Informed participation and feedback: information will be provided to and widely distributed among all
stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for communicating stakeholders’ feedback,
for analyzing and addressing comments and concerns;
 Inclusiveness and sensitivity: stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better communications and
build effective relationships. The participation process for the projects is inclusive. All stakeholders at all times
encouraged to be involved in the consultation process. Equal access to information is provided to all
stakeholders. Sensitivity to stakeholders’ needs is the key principle underlying the selection of engagement
methods. Special attention is given to vulnerable groups, in particular women, youth, elderly and the cultural
sensitivities of diverse ethnic groups.
For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of the proposed project(s) can be divided into
the following core categories:
 Affected Parties – persons, groups and other entities within the Project Area of Influence (PAI) that are directly
influenced (actually or potentially) by the project and/or have been identified as most susceptible to change
associated with the project, and who need to be closely engaged in identifying impacts and their significance, as
well as in decision-making on mitigation and management measures;
 Other Interested Parties – individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct impacts from the Project
but who consider or perceive their interests as being affected by the project and/or who could affect the project
and the process of its implementation in some way; and
 Vulnerable Groups – persons who may be disproportionately impacted or further disadvantaged by the
project(s) as compared with any other groups due to their vulnerable status
2,
and that may require special
engagement efforts to ensure their equal representation in the consultation and decision-making process
associated with the project.
2.2. Affected parties
Affected Parties include local communities, community members and other parties that may be subject to direct
impacts from the Project. Specifically, the following individuals and groups fall within this category:
Affected Parties include local communities, community members and other parties that may be subject to direct
impacts from the Project. Specifically, the following individuals and groups fall within this category:
- COVID-19 infected people and their family members and relatives
- People under COVID-19 quarantine
- Workers in quarantine, isolation facilities, diagnostic laboratories
- Communities in the vicinity of the project’s planned quarantine and isolation facilities, laboratories, and
screening posts
- People at risk of contracting COVID-19 (e.g., travelers, inhabitants of areas where cases have been
identified)
2
Vulnerable status may stem from an individual’s or group’s race, national, ethnic or social origin, color, gender, language,
religion, political or other opinion, property, age, culture, literacy, sickness, physical or mental disability, poverty or economic
disadvantage, and dependence on unique natural resources.
5
- Public Health Workers (Medical and emergency personnel and service providers at medical and testing
facilities both public and private)
- People involved in intercepting, identifying, and isolating suspected people (security agencies, district
administration, etc.)
- Primary, secondary and tertiary health care facilities
- Workers associated with handling, transportation and disposal of BMW
- Municipal and Village waste collection and disposal workers
- MoHFW and State Health departments
2.3. Other interested parties
The project stakeholders also include parties other than the directly affected communities, including:
a. Traditional media (Television, Radio, and print media in Hindi, English, and other regional languages)
b. Participants of social media
c. Politicians/ Elected representatives
d. Other national and international health organizations
e. Other national &international NGOs
f. Local businesses
g. Businesses with international links
h. The public at large
i. Other Ministries (Environment, Finance, External Affairs, Home,etc.)
j. Major public sector and private medical colleges and universities across the country
k. National security and law enforcement institutions/ agencies
2.4. Disadvantaged / vulnerable individuals or groups
It is particularly important to understand whether project impacts may disproportionately fall on disadvantaged or
vulnerable individuals or groups, who often do not have a voice to express their concerns or understand the
impacts of a project and to ensure that awareness raising and stakeholder engagement with disadvantaged or
vulnerable individuals or groups on infectious diseases and medical treatments in particular, be adapted to take
into account such groups or individuals particular sensitivities, concerns and cultural sensitivities and to ensure a
full understanding of project activities and benefits.The vulnerability may stem from person’s origin, gender, age,
health condition, economic deficiency and financial insecurity, disadvantaged status in the community (e.g.
minorities or fringe groups), dependence on other individuals or natural resources, etc.Engagement with the
vulnerable groups and individuals often requires the application of specific measures and assistance aimed at the
facilitation of their participation in the project-related decision making so that their awareness of and input to the
overall process are commensurate to those of the other stakeholders.
Within the Project, the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include and are not limited to the following:
- Elderly
- Illiterate or those with limited education
- People with disabilities
- Women, especially Young women and girls at heightened risk of gender-based violence
- Scheduled tribes (ST), scheduled castes (SC), and communities living in in remote and hilly locations
- Female-headed households, especially single mothers with underage children
- Unemployed youth
- Patients with chronic diseases
- Informal sector workers including domestic workers, laborers, construction workers, etc.
Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the project will be further confirmed and consulted through
dedicated means, as appropriate. Description of the methods of engagement that will be undertaken by the
project is provided in the following sections.
6
3. Stakeholder Engagement Program
3.1. Summary of stakeholder engagement done during project preparation
Due to the emergency situation, including the restrictions on consultations due to the need for social distancing,
and the need to address issues related to COVID19, no dedicated consultations beyond public authorities and
health experts have been conducted so far.
3.2. Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools and techniques for stakeholder
engagement
Stakeholder engagement under the project will be carried out on two fronts: (i) consultations with stakeholders
throughout the entire project cycle to inform them about the project, including their concerns, feedback and
complaints about the project and any activities related to the project; (ii) awareness-raising activities to sensitize
communities on the risks of COVID-19 which will be done largely under Component 4 of the project.
In terms of consultations with stakeholders on the project design, activities and implementation arrangements,
etc., the revised SEP, expected to be updated within 30 days after the project effectiveness date, and continuously
updated throughout the project implementation period when required, will clearly lay out:
- Type of Stakeholder to be consulted
- Anticipated Issues and Interests
- Stages of Involvement
- Methods of Involvement
- Proposed Communications Methods
- Information Disclosure
- Responsible authority/institution
For the awareness-raising activities under Component 4, project activities will support awareness around: (i) social
distancing measures such as school, restaurant, religious institution, and café closures as well as reducing large
gatherings (e.g. weddings); (ii) preventive actions such as personal hygiene promotion, including promoting
handwashing and proper cooking, and distribution and use of masks, along with increased awareness and
promotion of community participation in slowing the spread of the pandemic; (iii) design of comprehensive Social
and Behavior Change Communication (SBCC) strategy to support key prevention behaviors (washing hands, etc.),
community mobilization that will take place through credible and effective institutions and methods that reach the
local population and use of tv, radio, social media and printed materials as well as the community health workers;
(iv) awareness and provision of mental health and psychosocial services for vulnerable communities.
WHO’s “COVID-19 Strategic Preparedness and Response Plan -- Operational Planning Guidelines to Support
Country Preparedness and Response” (2020) will be the basis for the project’s stakeholder engagement. In
particular, Pillar 2 on Risk Communication and Community Engagement outlines the following approach:
It is critical to communicate to the public what is known about COVID‑19, what is unknown, what is being done,
and actions to be taken on a regular basis. Preparedness and response activities should be conducted in a
participatory, community-based way that are informed and continually optimized according to community
feedback to detect and respond to concerns, rumours and misinformation. Changes in preparedness and response
interventions should be announced and explained ahead of time and be developed based on community
perspectives. Responsive, empathic, transparent and consistent messaging in local languages through trusted
channels of communication, using community-based networks and key influencers and building capacity of local
entities, is essential to establish authority and trust.
7
Different engagement methods will be used depending on the different needs of the identified stakeholders and
on the need for the stakeholders to observe new social norms that help to prevent coronavirus transmission, and
may include small-scale focus group discussions, small-scale community consultations, one-to-one meetings,
virtual meetings, site visits, social media, print and broadcast media, etc.
3.3. Stakeholder engagement plan
For stakeholder engagement relating to public awareness, the following steps will be taken:
Step 1: Design of communication strategy
- Conduct rapid behavior assessment to understand key target audience, perceptions, concerns, influencers
and preferred communication channels
- Prepare a comprehensive Social and Behavior Change Communication (SBCC) strategy for COVID-19,
including details of anticipated public health measures
- Prepare local messages and pre-test through participatory process, especially targeting key stakeholders,
vulnerable groups and at-risk populations
- Identify trusted community groups (e.g., celebrities, elected representatives, community leaders, religious
leaders, health workers, community volunteers) and local networks to support the communication
strategy
Step 2: Implementation of the Communication Strategy
- Establish and utilize clearance processes for timely dissemination of messages and materials in Hindi,
English and other regional languages where relevant, for timely dissemination of messages and materials
in local languages and adopt relevant communication channels
- Engage with existing health and community-based networks, media, local NGOs,self-help groups, schools,
local governments and other sectors such healthcare service providers, education sector, business, travel
and food/agriculture sectors using a consistent mechanism of communication
- Utilize two-way “channels” for community and public information sharing such as help desks, responsive
social media, TV and radio shows, with systems to detect and rapidly respond to and counter
misinformation
- Establish large-scale community engagement strategy for social and behavior change approaches to
ensure preventive community and individual health and hygiene practices in line with the national public
health containment recommendations. Given the need to also consider social distancing, the strategy
would focus on using IT-based technology, telecommunications, mobile technology, social media
platforms, print and broadcast media, etc.
Step 3: Learning and Feedback
- Systematically establish community information and feedback mechanisms including through social media
monitoring, community perceptions, knowledge, attitude, and practice surveys, and direct dialogues and
consultations. In the current context, these will be carried out virtually to prevent COVID-19 transmission.
- Ensure changes to community engagement approaches are based on evidence and needs, and ensure all
engagement is culturally appropriate and empathetic
- Document lessons learned to inform future preparedness and response activities.
For stakeholder engagement relating to the specifics of the project and project activities, different modes of
communication will be utilized:
- Policymakers and influencers might be reached through small engagement meetings with religious,
administrative, youth, and women’s groups.
- Individual communities might be reached through theatre performance engagement meetings with
women groups, edutainment, youth groups, training of peer educators, etc.
8
- For public at large, identified and trusted media channels including: Broadcast media (television and
radio), print media (newspapers, magazines), trusted organizations’ websites, social media (Facebook,
Twitter, etc.), text messages for mobile phones, hand-outs and brochures in community and health
centers, municipal forums, community health boards, billboards plan, will be utilized to tailor key
information and guidance to stakeholders and disseminate it through their preferred channels and
trusted partners.
This Stakeholder Engagement Plan as well as the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that
will be prepared under the project will also be consulted and disclosed. The project includes considerable
resources to implement the above-mentioned activities and actions. The details of this will be prepared during the
update of this SEP, expected to be updated within 30 days after the project effectiveness date, and continuously
updated throughout the project implementation period when required.
3.4. Proposed strategy for information disclosure
The project will ensure that the different activities for stakeholder engagement, including information disclosure,
are inclusive and culturally sensitive. Measures will also be taken to ensure that the vulnerable groups outlined
above will have the chance to participate in the project benefits. This will include, among other things,
householdoutreach through SMS, telephone calls, etc., depending on the social distancing requirements, the use
of different languages (Hindi, English and other regional languages to target local areas), the use of verbal
communication, audiovisuals or pictures instead of text, etc. The project will thereby have to adapt to different
requirements. While country-wide awareness campaigns will be established, specific communication around
borders and international airports as well as quarantine centres and laboratories will have to be timed according to
need and be adjusted to the specific local circumstance. Component-wise analysis will strengthen this exercise.The
ESMF and SEP will be disclosed prior to formal consultations.
A preliminary strategy for information disclosure is as follows:
Project stage Target stakeholders List of
information to be
disclosed
Methods and timing proposed
Preparation of
social
distancing and
SBCC strategy
Government entities; local
communities; vulnerable
groups; school children and
their parents, NGOs and
academics; health workers;
media representatives;
health agencies; others
Project
documents, SEP,
GRM procedure,
update on project
development
Dissemination of hard copies at designated
public locations, MoHFW and State health
department websites; Information leaflets
and brochures
Implementation
of public
awareness
campaigns
Affected parties, public at
large, vulnerable groups,
public health workers,
government entities, other
public authorities
Update on project
development; the
social distancing
and SBCC strategy
Public notices; Electronic publications and
press releases; Press releases in the local
media; Information leaflets and brochures;
audio-visual materials, social media and
other direct communication channels such
as mobile/ telephone calls, SMS, etc.
Site selection
for local
isolation units
and quarantine
facilities
People under COVID-19
quarantine, including
workers in the facilities;
Relatives of
patients/affected people;
neighboring communities;
public health workers; other
Project
documents,
technical designs
of the isolation
units and
quarantine
facilities, SEP,
Public notices; Electronic publications and
press releases on the Project website; Press
releases in the local media; Help desk
mechanism
9
Project stage Target stakeholders List of
information to be
disclosed
Methods and timing proposed
public authorities; island
councils; civil society
organizations
relevant E&S
documents, GRM
procedure, regular
updates on Project
development
During
preparation of
ESMF
People under COVID-19
quarantine, including
workers in the facilities;
Relatives of
patients/affected people;
neighboring communities;
public health workers; other
public authorities; island
councils; civil society
organizations
Project
documents,
technical designs
of the isolation
units and
quarantine
facilities, SEP,
relevant E&S
documents, GRM
procedure, regular
updates on Project
development
Public notices; Electronic publications and
press releases on the Project website; Press
releases in the local media; other direct
communication channels such as mobile/
telephone calls, SMS, etc.; Help desk
mechanism
During project
implementation
COVID-affected persons and
their families, neighboring
communities to
laboratories, quarantine
centers, resorts and
workers, workers at
construction sites of
quarantine centers and
screening posts, public
health workers, MoH,
airline and border control
staff, government entities,
island councils
SEP, relevant E&S
documents; GRM
procedure; regular
updates on Project
development
Public notices; Electronic publications and
press releases on the Project website; Press
releases in the local media; Consultation
with vulnerable groupsusing mobile/
telephone calls, SMS, etc.; Help desk
mechanism
3.. Future of the project
Stakeholders will be kept informed as the project develops, including reporting on project environmental and
social performance and implementation of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan and grievance mechanism.
4. Resources and Responsibilitiesfor implementing stakeholder engagement activities
4.1. Resources
The MOHFW, along with other Ministries and NDMA/SDMAs, will be in charge of stakeholder engagement
activities for their respective components. Overall coordination will be with MOHFW for this purpose. The budget
for the SEP is included under Component 4 – Mitigation of Social Impact of the project ofthe project.
10
4.2. Management functions and responsibilities
As mentioned above, the nodal agency at the center and the state level within the MOHFW and state health
departments will be responsible for implementing the SEP while working closely with other agency and
institutions such State Health Societies and NDMA/SDMAs.The stakeholder engagement activities will be
documented through quarterly progress reports, to be shared with the World Bank.
5. Grievance Mechanism
The main objective of a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is to assist to resolve complaints and grievances in a
timely, effective and efficient manner that satisfies all parties involved. Specifically, it provides a transparent and
credible process for fair, effective and lasting outcomes. It also builds trust and cooperation as an integral
component of broader community consultation that facilitates corrective actions. Specifically, the GRM:
 Provides affected people with avenues for making a complaint or resolving any dispute that may arise
during the course of the implementation of projects;
 Ensures that appropriate and mutually acceptable redress actions are identified and implemented to the
satisfaction of complainants; and
 Avoids the need to resort to judicial proceedings (at least at first).
5.1. Description of GRM
Grievances will be handled at the MoHFWand State level by the concerned official designated for the GRM and
using the Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System at the MoHFW. The GRM will include the
following steps:
Step 0: Raising and registering the grievances using various mechanism including through Help desk,
online using internet, email, Walk-ins and registering a complaint on grievance logbook at healthcare
facility or suggestion box at clinic/hospitals
Step 1: Grievance raised is screened and forwarded to respective administrative/ facility level for
redressing
Step 2: Grievance discussed at the respective administrative/ facility level, and addressed
Step 3: If not addressed in stipulated period it is escalated to next level and finally the MoHFW level
Step 4: Once addressed, feedback sent to the complainant
Step 5: If not satisfied, appeal to the other public authorities
Once all possible redress has been proposed and if the complainant is still not satisfied then they should be
advised of their right to legal recourse.
The numbers and contacts of the GRM will be detailed in the final SEP.
6. Monitoring and Reporting
The SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary in the course of project implementation in order to
ensure that the information presented herein is consistent and is the most recent, and that the identified methods
of engagement remain appropriate and effective in relation to the project context and specific phases of the
development. Any major changes to the project related activities and to its schedule will be duly reflected in the
SEP.Monthly summaries and internal reports on public grievances, enquiries and related incidents, together with
the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventative actions will be collated by responsible staff and
referred to the senior management of the project. The monthly summaries will provide a mechanism for assessing
both the number and the nature of complaints and requests for information, along with the Project’s ability to
address those in a timely and effective manner.Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the
Project during the year may be conveyed to the stakeholders in two possible ways:
 Publication of a standalone annual report on project’s interaction with the stakeholders.
11
 A number of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) will also be monitored by the project on a regular basis,
including the following parameters:
o Number of consultations carried out within a reporting period (e.g. monthly, quarterly, or annually);
number of public grievances received within a reporting period (e.g. monthly, quarterly, or annually);
and number of those resolved within the prescribed timeline; number of press materials published/
broadcasted in the local, regional, and national media.
Further details on the SEP will be outlined in the updated SEP, to be prepared and disclosed within 30 days
after the project effectiveness date.
