<Characteristics of the transmission route>
◆ So far, approximately 80% of the confirmed infection cases in Japan have not transmitted
the infection to others.
◆ Meanwhile, cases have been reported where a single infected patient has transmitted
the infection to multiple persons in areas such as athletic gyms, houseboats, buffet
style meals, mahjong rooms, guest houses at ski resorts, and air-tight provisional
tents.
Places where outbreaks occur tend to be:
poorly ventilated; spaces where people gather closely together; places
where an unspecified number of people are likely to come into contact.
Preventing the infection from
spreading
Preventing Outbreaks of the Novel
Coronavirus
In Japan, sporadic cases of small numbers of patients have been observed.
At this stage, the spread of infection can be prevented by tracing the route of transmission,
especially for close contacts.
The important thing is to minimize the spread of infection in the country by:
preventing one cluster of patients from creating another cluster.
*A cluster of patients refers to a group of a few to several dozen patients
with known transmission routes.
Request to the people of Japan
◇ Avoid gathering in groups in areas with poor ventilation where people gather closely
together.
◇ Organizers of events should consider the necessity of holding any event, whether big or
small, due to the high risk of infection posed by spaces with poor ventilation, and
environments where people communicate at close range. If you do hold the event, take
precautionary measures to avoid creating spaces with poor ventilation.
These findings are considered to be the best practices at this time and are subject to change
as further epidemiological information becomes available and research progresses.
The Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare is working to provide support in various areas. To do this, we
established a Cluster Response Team comprised of experts on infectious diseases in Japan to work with
local governments that have detected clusters to take various actions, including early detection of a
cluster, dispatch of expert teams, collection and analysis of data, and recommendation of
countermeasures.
March 1, 2020 Edition
