Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: guidance for education settings
Updated 26 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for educational settings
Department
for Education
Public Health
England
Contents
What you need to know
Background
Symptoms
What to do if someone develops symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) on site
Limiting spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) in educational settings
Cleaning and Waste
Tools for use in childcare and educational settings
What you need to know
staff, young people and children should stay at home if they are unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high
temperature to avoid spreading infection to others. Otherwise they should attend education or work as normal
if staff, young people or children become unwell on site with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature they
should be sent home
clean and disinfect regularly touched objects and surfaces more often than usual using your standard cleaning products
supervise young children to ensure they wash their hands for 20 seconds more often than usual with soap and water or
hand sanitiser and catch coughs and sneezes in tissues
posters and lesson plans on general hand hygiene can be found on theeBug website
unless you have been directly advised to close by the local Public Health England Health Protection Team, we
recommend all education settings remain open
Background
This guidance will assist staff in addressing coronavirus (COVID-19) in educational settings. This includes childcare,
schools, further and higher educational institutions.
This guidance may be updated in line with the changing situation.
Symptoms
The most common symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) are a new, continuous cough or a high temperature.
For most people, coronavirus (COVID-19) will be a mild infection.
What to do if someone develops symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) on
site
If anyone becomes unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature in an education setting they should be sent
home and advised to follow the staying at home guidance.
If a child is awaiting collection, they should be moved, if possible and if appropriate, to a room where they can be isolated
behind a closed door. Settings should be mindful of individual children’s needs – for example it would not be appropriate
for younger children to be alone without adult supervision. Ideally, a window should be opened for ventilation. If it is not
possible to isolate them, move them to an area which is at least 2 metres away from other people.
If they need to go to the bathroom while waiting to be collected, they should use a separate bathroom if possible. The
bathroom should be cleaned and disinfected using standard cleaning products before being used by anyone else.
If they need clinical advice, they (or their teacher, parent or guardian) should go online toNHS 111 (or call 111 if they don’t
have internet access). In an emergency, call 999 if they are seriously ill or injured or their life is at risk. Do not visit the GP,
pharmacy, urgent care centre or a hospital.
If a member of staff has helped someone who was taken unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature, they
do not need to go home unless they develop symptoms themselves. They should wash their hands thoroughly for 20
seconds after any contact with someone who is unwell.
In most cases, closure of the educational setting will not be needed but this will be a local decision based on various
factors such as establishment size and risk of further spread.
If there is an urgent public health action to take, the educational setting will be contacted by the local Public Health
England Health Protection Team who will undertake a risk assessment and advise on any actions or precautions that
should be taken. PHE will rarely advise a school to close but this may be necessary if there are so many staff being
isolated that the school has operational issues. Your local authority will support you to make this assessment. PHE will
work with the headteacher, principal or management team, and the Local Authority Public Health team, to advise on the
management of children, pupils, students or staff.
Limiting spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) in educational settings
Education settings can help reduce the spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) by reminding everyone of the public health
advice.
Staff, children, pupils, students and families should be reminded to wash their hands for 20 seconds more frequently than
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
normal.
Frequently clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are touched regularly, using your standard cleaning products.
Posters, leaflets and other materials are available.
Cleaning and Waste
See guidance on cleaning and waste disposal.
Tools for use in childcare and educational settings
There is a dedicated helpline number for educational settings – please call 0800 046 8687 for any specific question not
covered on this page.
PHE has resource materials that contain public health advice about how you can help stop the spread of viruses, like
those that cause coronavirus (COVID-19), by practising good respiratory and hand hygiene. To access, download and
share this information, you will need to register for an account which only takes a couple of minutes.
Use e-Bug resources to teach pupils about hygiene.
Education Scotland produces resources for the use of schools in Scotland.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
