Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Stay at home: guidance for households with
possible coronavirus (COVID-19) infection
Updated 24 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for households with possible coronavirus infection
Public Health
England
Contents
Symptoms
Main messages
Who this guidance is for
Will my household be tested if we think we have coronavirus symptoms?
Why staying at home is very important
While you are staying at home, make sure you do the following things
If you are living with children
If you have a vulnerable person living with you
importance of staying at home
Symptoms
The most common symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) are recent onset of:
new continuous cough and/or
high temperature
For most people, coronavirus (COVID-19) will be a mild illness.
Main messages
if you live alone and you have symptoms of coronavirus illness (COVID-19), however mild, stay at home for7 days
from when your symptoms started. (The ending isolation section below has more information)
after 7 days, if you do not have a high temperature, you do not need to continue to self-isolate. If you still have a high
temperature, keep self-isolating until your temperature returns to normal. You do not need to self-isolate if you just have
a cough after 7 days, as a cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone
if you live with others and you are the first in the household to have symptoms of coronavirus, then you must stay at
home for 7 days, but all other household members who remain well must stay at home and not leave the house for 14
days. The 14-day period starts from the day when the first person in the house became ill. See the
explanatory
diagram
for anyone else in the household who starts displaying symptoms, they need to stay at home for 7 days from when the
symptoms appeared, regardless of what day they are on in the original 14 day isolation period. The ending isolation
section below has more information, and see the explanatory diagram
it is likely that people living within a household will infect each other or be infected already. Staying at home for 14 days
will greatly reduce the overall amount of infection the household could pass on to others in the community
if you can, move any vulnerable individuals (such as the elderly and those with underlying health conditions) out of your
home, to stay with friends or family for the duration of the home isolation period
if you cannot move vulnerable people out of your home, stay away from them as much as possible
if you have coronavirus symptoms:
do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital
you do not need to contact 111 to tell them you’re staying at home
testing for coronavirus is not needed if you’re staying at home
wash your hands regularly for 20 seconds, each time using soap and water, or use hand sanitiser
if you feel you cannot cope with your symptoms at home, or your condition gets worse, or your symptoms do not get
better after 7 days, then use the NHS 111 online coronavirus service. If you do not have internet access, call NHS 111.
For a medical emergency dial 999
Who this guidance is for
This advice is intended for:
people with symptoms that may be caused by coronavirus, and do not require hospital treatment, who must remain at
If you are breastfeeding while infected
Cleaning and disposal of waste
Laundry
What you can do to help yourself get better
If you or your family need to seek medical advice
Wash your hands often
Cover your coughs and sneezes
Facemasks
Do not have visitors in your home
If you have pets in the household
Looking after your wellbeing while staying at home
Ending self-isolation and household-isolation
home until they are well
those living in households with someone who shows symptoms that may be caused by coronavirus
Will my household be tested if we think we have coronavirus symptoms?
Testing for coronavirus is not needed if you’re staying at home.
Why staying at home is very important
It is very important that individuals with symptoms that may be due to coronavirus and their household members stay at
home. Staying at home will help control the spread of the virus to friends, the wider community, and particularly the most
vulnerable.
Those with symptoms and living alone should remain at home for 7 days after the onset of their symptoms (see
ending
self-isolation below). This will reduce the risk of you infecting others.
If you live with others and you or one of them have symptoms that may be caused by coronavirus, then household
members must stay at home and not leave your house for 14 days (more information in the ending self-isolation section
below). If possible, you should not go out even to buy food or other essentials, other than exercise, and in that case at a
safe distance from others. The 14-day period starts from the day when the first person in your house became ill.
If not possible, then you should do what you can to limit your social contact when you leave the house to get supplies.
It is likely that people living within a household will infect each other or may already be infected. Staying at home for 14
days will greatly reduce the overall amount of infection the household could pass on to others in the community.
Staying at home may be difficult and frustrating, but there are things that you can do to help make it easier. These include:
plan ahead and think about what you will need in order to be able to stay at home for the full 7 or 14 days
talk to your employer, friends and family to ask for their help to access the things you will need to make your stay at
home a success
think about and plan how you can get access to food and other supplies such as medications that you will need during
this period
ask friends or family to drop off anything you need or order supplies online, but make sure these are left outside your
home for you to collect
make sure that you keep in touch with friends and family over the phone or through social media
think about things you can do during your time at home. People who have successfully completed a period of staying at
home have kept themselves busy with activities such as cooking, reading, online learning and watching films
many people find it helpful to plan out the full 14 days, such as on a make-shift calendar. You may also find it helpful to
plan in advance what you will do if, for example, someone in the household were to feel much worse, such as have
difficulties breathing
when you are feeling better, remember that physical exercise can be good for your wellbeing. Look for online classes or
courses that can help you take light exercise in your home
While you are staying at home, make sure you do the following things
Stay at home
You and all household members should remain at home. Donot go to work, school, or public areas, and donot use public
transport or taxis.
If possible, you should not go out even to buy food or other essentials, other than exercise, and in that case at a safe
distance from others. The 14-day period starts from the day the first person in your house became ill.
If you require help with buying groceries, other shopping or picking up medication, or walking a dog, you will need to ask
friends or relatives. Alternatively, you can order medication by phone or online. You can also order your shopping online.
Make sure you tell delivery drivers to leave items outside for collection if you order online. The delivery driver should not
come into your home.
If you are an employee and unable to work due to coronavirus, please refer to thisguidance from the Department for Work
and Pensions to find out about the support that is available to you.
If you are living with children
Keep following this advice to the best of your ability, however, we are aware that not all these measures will be possible.
What we have seen so far is that children with coronavirus appear to be less severely affected. It is nevertheless important
to do your best to follow this guidance.
If you have a vulnerable person living with you
Minimise as much as possible the time any vulnerable family members spend in shared spaces such as kitchens,
bathrooms and sitting areas, and keep shared spaces well ventilated.
Aim to keep 2 metres (3 steps) away from vulnerable people you live with and encourage them to sleep in a different bed
where possible. If they can, they should use a separate bathroom from the rest of the household. Make sure they use
separate towels from the other people in your house, both for drying themselves after bathing or showering and for hand-
hygiene purposes.
If you do share a toilet and bathroom with a vulnerable person, it is important that you clean them every time you use them
(for example, wiping surfaces you have come into contact with). Another tip is to consider drawing up a rota for bathing,
with the vulnerable person using the facilities first.
If you share a kitchen with a vulnerable person, avoid using it while they are present. If they can, they should take their
meals back to their room to eat. If you have one, use a dishwasher to clean and dry the family’s used crockery and cutlery.
If this is not possible, wash them using your usual washing up liquid and warm water and dry them thoroughly. If the
vulnerable person is using their own utensils, remember to use a separate tea towel for drying these.
We understand that it will be difficult for some people to separate themselves from others at home. You should do your
very best to follow this guidance and everyone in your household should regularly wash their hands, avoid touching their
face, and clean frequently touched surfaces.
If you are breastfeeding while infected
There is currently no evidence to suggest that the virus can be transmitted through breast milk. Infection can be spread to
the baby in the same way as to anyone in close contact with you. The current evidence is that children with coronavirus
get much less severe symptoms than adults. The benefits of breastfeeding outweigh any potential risks of transmission of
the virus through breast milk or by being in close contact; however, this will be an individual decision and can be discussed
with your midwife, health visitor or GP by telephone.
If you or a family member are feeding with formula or expressed milk, you should sterilise the equipment carefully before
each use. You should not share bottles or a breast pump with someone else.
You can find more information at theRoyal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists website
.
Cleaning and disposal of waste
When cleaning you should use your usual household products, like detergents and bleach, as these will be very effective
at getting rid of the virus on surfaces. Clean frequently touched surfaces such as door handles, handrails, remote controls
and table tops. This is particularly important if you have an older or vulnerable person in the house.
Personal waste (such as used tissues) and disposable cleaning cloths can be stored securely within disposable rubbish
bags. These bags should be placed into another bag, tied securely and kept separate from other waste. This should be
put aside for at least 72 hours before being put in your usual external household waste bin.
Other household waste can be disposed of as normal.
Laundry
To minimise the possibility of dispersing virus through the air, do not shake dirty laundry.
Wash items as appropriate in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. All dirty laundry can be washed in the
same load.
If you do not have a washing machine, wait a further 72 hours after your 7-day (for individual isolation) or 14-day isolation
period (for households) has ended when you can then take the laundry to a public launderette.
What you can do to help yourself get better
Drink water to keep yourself hydrated; you should drink enough during the day so your urine (pee) is a pale clear colour.
You can use over-the-counter medications, such as paracetamol, to help with some of your symptoms. Use these
according to the instructions on the packet or label and do not exceed the recommended dose.
If you or your family need to seek medical advice
Seek prompt medical attention if your illness or the illness in any household members is worsening. If it’s not an
emergency, contact NHS 111 online. If you have no internet access, you should call NHS 111. If it is an emergency and
you need to call an ambulance, dial 999 and inform the call handler or operator that you or your relative have coronavirus
symptoms.
All routine medical and dental appointments should usually be cancelled whilst you and the family are staying at home. If
you are concerned or have been asked to attend in person within the period you are home isolating, discuss this with your
medical contact first (for example, your GP, local hospital or outpatient service), using the number they have provided. If
your concerns are related to your coronavirus symptoms contact NHS 111 online. If you have no internet access, you
should call NHS 111.
Wash your hands often
Clean your hands frequently each day by washing with soap and water for 20 seconds or using hand sanitiser. This will
help protect you and the people you live with. This step is one of the most effective ways of reducing the risk of passing
infection to others.
Cover your coughs and sneezes
Cover your mouth and nose with disposable tissues when you cough or sneeze. If you do not have one to hand, sneeze
into the crook of your elbow, not into your hand.
If you have a carer, they should use disposable tissues to wipe away any mucus or phlegm after you have sneezed or
coughed. Then they should wash their hands with soap and water.
Dispose of tissues into a disposable rubbish bag and immediately wash your hands with soap and water or use a hand
sanitiser.
Facemasks
We do not recommend the use of facemasks as an effective means of preventing the spread of infection. Facemasks play
an important role in clinical settings, such as hospitals, but there’s very little evidence of benefit from their use outside of
these settings.
Do not have visitors in your home
Do not invite or allow social visitors, such as other friends and family, to enter your home. If you want to speak to someone
who is not a member of your household, use the phone or social media.
If you or a family member receive essential care in your home, then carers should continue to visit. Carers will be provided
with facemasks and gloves to reduce the risk of you passing on the infection.
If you have pets in the household
At present, there is no evidence that companion animals/pets such as dogs and cats can be infected with coronavirus.
Looking after your wellbeing while staying at home
We know that staying at home for a prolonged period can be difficult, frustrating and lonely for some people and that you
or other household members may feel low. It can be particularly challenging if you don’t have much space or access to a
garden.
It’s important to remember to take care of your mind as well as your body and to get support if you need it. Stay in touch
with family and friends over the phone or on social media. There are also sources of support and information that can help,
such as the Every Mind Matters website.
Think about things you can do during your time at home. People who have not minded staying at home for a week have
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
kept themselves busy with activities such as cooking, reading, online learning and watching films. If you feel well enough
you can take part in light exercise within your home or garden.
Many people find it helpful to remind themselves why what they are doing is so important. Hopefully, none of your family
will suffer more than flu-like symptoms. But some people are badly affected by coronavirus, and particularly the elderly
and those with certain medical conditions. By staying home, you are protecting the lives of others, as well as making sure
the NHS does not get overwhelmed.
Ending self-isolation and household-isolation
Self-isolation
If you have been symptomatic, then you may end your self-isolation after 7 days. The 7-day period starts from the day
when you first became ill
Household isolation
If living with others, then all household members who remain well may end household-isolation after 14 days. The 14-day
period starts from the day illness began in the first person to become ill. Fourteen days is the incubation period for
coronavirus; people who remain well after 14 days are unlikely to be infectious.
After 7 days, if the first person to become ill feels better and no longer has a high temperature, they can return to their
normal routine. If any other family members become unwell during the 14-day household-isolation period, they should
follow the same advice - that is, after 7 days of their symptoms starting, if they feel better and no longer have a high
temperature, they can also return to their normal routine.
Should a household member develop coronavirus symptoms late in the 14-day household-isolation period (for example,
on day 13 or day 14) the isolation period does not need to be extended, but the person with the new symptoms has
to stay at home for 7 days. The 14-day household-isolation period will have greatly reduced the overall amount of
infection the rest of the household could pass on, and it is not necessary to restart 14 days of isolation for the whole
household. This will have provided a high level of community protection. Further isolation of members of this household
will provide very little additional community protection.
At the end of the 14-day period, any family member who has not become unwell can leave household isolation.
If any ill person in the household has not had any signs of improvement and have not already sought medical advice, they
should contact NHS 111 online. If your home has no internet access, you should call NHS 111.
The cough may persist for several weeks in some people, despite the coronavirus infection having cleared. A persistent
cough alone does not mean someone must continue to self-isolate for more than 7 days.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
