HIGHLIGHTS
• Union Minister along with WHO representative participated in a virtual
interactive session with Health Ministers of member states of WHO sharing
measures being taken for containment of COVID-19 in India. He stressed “the
crisis arising out of COVID-19 has been turned into an opportunity to
strengthen the healthcare delivery system in the country”, details here.
• MoHFW launched the COVID India Seva an interactive platform and direct
channel of communication aimed at enabling transparent e-governance
delivery in real-time and answering citizen queries swiftly, at scale, especially
in crisis situations like the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, details here.
• Group of Ministers (GoM) continue to undertake detailed deliberation on the
measures taken by the Centre and various States/UTs for prevention,
containment and management of COVID-19, details here.
• Ordinance was promulgated by the President of India to amend the Epidemic
Diseases Act, 1897 to protect healthcare service personnel against violence
during epidemics, ascertaining “zero tolerance to any form of violence against
healthcare service and such acts of violence will now be cognizable and non-
bailable offences”, details here.
• WHO together with MoHFW is supporting districts to follow and further
strengthen their contingency plans to combat COVID-19; including assessment of dedicated COVID-19
hospitals along with the adequacy of isolation beds/wards and other supplies, details here.
INDIA SITUATION
• As of 26 April 2020 (5:00PM), a total of 26 917 COVID-19 cases (111 foreign nationals) in 32 states/union
territories, including 5913 cured/discharged,1 migrated, 826 deaths. Active cases: 20 177, details here.
SITUATION IN
NUMBERS
India
26 917 Confirmed
826 Deaths
32 States/UTs
South-East Asia
41 073 Confirmed
1658 Deaths
Globally
2 719 897 Confirmed
187 705 Deaths
WHO Classification
India - Clusters of cases
WHO GLOBAL UPDATE
• WHO, together with heads of state, global leaders, private sector partners and other stakeholders launched the
Access To COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator, a global collaboration to accelerate the development,
production and equitable access to new COVID-19 diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines, details here.
• WHO has seen a dramatic increase in the number of cyber-attacks directed at its staff, and email scams
targeting the public. WHO has urged the public to remain vigilant against fraudulent emails and
recommends using reliable sources to obtain information about COVID-19 and other health issues. details here.
WHO COUNTRY UPDATE
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) continues to work closely with MoHFW, on preparedness and response
measures for COVID-19, including surveillance and contact tracing, laboratory diagnosis, risk communications and
community engagement, hospital preparedness, infection prevention and control (IPC) and implementation of
containment strategies.
• Co-ordination and Partnership: WCO hosted the Health Partners virtual meeting to facilitate consensus and
draft implementation strategy to support the MHFW as ‘One UN’ through the Joint Response Plan.
• Laboratory testing: WHO is providing kits and reagents to COVID-19 testing laboratories through ICMR to
partly meet their huge testing requirement. A total of 625 309 samples have been tested so far, details here.
o ICMR had clearly laid down the scope, purpose and usage of the rapid antibody tests. ICMR has
always emphasized that the confirmatory test for diagnosis of COVID-19 infection is RT - PCR test of
throat and/ or nasal swab, which detects virus at early stage, details here.
o ICMR expanded the testing strategy to pregnant women residing in clusters/containment area or in
large migration gatherings/evacuees centre from hotspot districts presenting in labour or likely to
deliver in next 5 days should be tested even if asymptomatic, details here.
• Surveillance: SARI surveillance is being strengthened in states with support from WCO field staff. SMOs in the
field are facilitating CIF filling and IHIP portal data entry along with following up on SARI/ILI surveillance.
• Research: ICMR had announced conducting a national sero-prevalence survey for Covid-19. WCO field teams
are supporting states in the initial preparations for undertaking the proposed Survey.
o India has joined the WHO Solidarity Trial for therapeutic treatment options for COVID 19. The trial has
received clearance from the regulatory authority of India to move ahead with the trial.
• Risk Communication: WHO is supporting MoHFW on a Campaign to address the issue of stigma, in the
society both against COVID positive cases and the medical community.
• State Support: WCO is supporting states through field teams and is now in the process of creating a pool for
experts to be part of rapid response teams for special deployment.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
For all authentic & updated information on COVID-19 related technical issues, guidelines & advisories please regularly
visit: https://www.mohfw.gov.in/. In case of any queries on COVID-19, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare helpline
no.: +91-11-23978046 or 1075 (Toll-free). Helpline numbers of States/UTs on COVID-19 available here.
FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
WHO Country Office for India I Telephone number: +91-11- 66564800 I Email: wrindia@who.int
