Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19 and temporary storage of incinerator
bottom ash aggregate: RPS C16
Published 30 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19 and temporary storage of incinerator bottom ash aggregate: RPS C16
This COVID-19 regulatory position statement (RPS) only applies:
Contents
1. When this COVID-19 RPS applies
2. Conditions you must comply with
3. Enforcement
4. When to check back
5. Contact the Environment Agency
to temporarily storing incinerator bottom ash aggregate (IBAA) at a permitted site when your permit does not allow
storage of IBAA
where there is a lack of market demand forIBAA due to coronavirus restrictions and there is no capacity to storeIBAA
at the incinerator bottom ash treatment facility
Before you use this COVID-19 RPS, you must email your Environment Agency area regulatory officer, site inspector or
local compliance team to get their written agreement.
1. When this COVID-19 RPS applies
This COVID-19 RPS only applies to storingIBAA (European Waste Catalogue (EWC) code 19 12 12) at your permitted
site, when your permit does not allow you to store this waste type.
This COVID-19 RPS does not apply to any other activity, even if it is under the same legislation. You may still need other
permits or licences for other activities you carry out.
2. Conditions you must comply with
Before you accept the IBAA onto your permitted site, you must notify the Environment Agency by email and get our written
agreement. Contact your area regulatory officer, site inspector or local compliance team.
We need to agree to both:
the total tonnage ofIBAA you want to store at any one time on your permitted site
how you intend to store it
You must keep to the terms of this agreement.
You must:
only receive IBAA (EWC 19 12 12) at your site under this COVID-19RPS
only store IBAA (EWC 19 12 12) at your site
take full responsibility for theIBAA you receive on your site
store all IBAA within an agreed site boundary and on hardstanding
contain and treat IBAA runoff to prevent pollution to land or water
take measures to prevent anyIBAA dust nuisance
keep all IBAA storage areas secure to prevent unauthorised access
make sure you remove all theIBAA from your site as soon as possible and in all cases by 30 September 2020
keep records on the tonnage ofIBAA you stored at your site for the duration of this COVID-19RPS
keep these records for 2 years after this COVID-19RPS has expired, including any extensions to it
make these records available to the Environment Agency on request
You must not:
at any one time store moreIBAA under this COVID-19 RPS than we have agreed with you
breach the terms we have agreed with you
You must make sure yourIBAA storage activity does not harm human health or pollute the environment.
For waste operations you must not:
cause a risk to water, air, soil, plants or animals
cause a nuisance through noise or odours
adversely affect the countryside or places of special interest
Places of special interest include, but are not limited to:
Special Areas of Conservation
Special Protection Areas
Ramsar sites
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
national and local nature reserves
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
The UK has left the EU
Transition period: get ready for 2021
Services and information
Benefits
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Marine Conservation Zones
National Parks
3. Enforcement
A COVID-19 RPS means that the Environment Agency will not normally take enforcement action against you provided:
your activity meets the description set out in this COVID-19RPS
you comply with the conditions set out in this COVID-19RPS
your activity does not, and is not likely to, cause environmental pollution or harm human health
you have complied with your permit
If you operate under this COVID-19 RPS but think you may no longer be able to comply with its conditions, you must tell
your Environment Agency area regulatory officer, site inspector or local compliance team immediately.
The Environment Agency will monitor how operators use and comply with this COVID-19RPS through its proportionate,
risk-based inspection and monitoring activity.
4. When to check back
This COVID-19 RPS will expire on 30 September 2020 unless we extend it.
By 30 September 2020 you must:
remove all IBAA waste from your site
fully comply with your permit
5. Contact the Environment Agency
Email your Environment Agency area regulatory officer, site inspector or local compliance team to get their agreement to
use this COVID-19 RPS.
Please put this wording in the title of your email:
Waste COVID-19 RPS C16: for action
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
