Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: investigation and initial clinical
management of possible cases
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: investigation and initial clinical management of possible cases
Public Health
England
1. Latest updates to this page
30 March: addition of advice for influenza testing added to section 3.2
Contents
1. Latest updates to this page
2. Preparing for an assessment
3. Case definitions: possible case, as of 13 March 2020
4. Action to take if inpatient definition is met
5. De-escalation of IPC measures in hospital
2. Preparing for an assessment
Clinicians should:
implement infection prevention and control measures whilst awaiting test results, including isolation and cohorting of
patients in line with your Trust seasonal influenza operational plan
assess individuals in a single occupancy room
wear personal protective equipment (PPE) – as a minimum, this should be a fluid resistant surgical mask, single use
disposable apron and gloves and eye protection if blood and or body fluid contamination to the eyes or face is
anticipated. If a patient meeting the case definition undergoes an aerosol generating procedure, then a FFP3 respirator,
long-sleeved disposable fluid-repellent gown, gloves and eye protection must be worn; refer to infection prevention and
control (IPC) guidance
ask the patient to wear a surgical facemask while transporting them to the single room or cohort area
3. Case definitions: possible case, as of 13 March 2020
3.1 Patients who meet the following criteria (inpatient definition)
requiring admission to hospital (a hospital practitioner has decided that admission to hospital is required with an
expectation that the patient will need to stay at least one night)
and
have either clinical or radiological evidence of pneumonia
or
acute respiratory distress syndrome
or
influenza like illness (fever ≥37.8°C and at least one of the following respiratory symptoms, which must be of acute
onset: persistent cough (with or without sputum), hoarseness, nasal discharge or congestion, shortness of breath, sore
throat, wheezing, sneezing
Note: Clinicians should consider testing inpatients with new respiratory symptoms or fever without another cause or
worsening of a pre-existing respiratory condition.
3.2 Patients who meet the following criteria and are well enough to remain in the community
new continuous cough and/or
high temperature
Individuals with cough or fever should nowstay at home. Those staying at home arenot prioritised for testing.
Clinicians should be alert to the possibility of atypical presentations in patients who are immunocompromised.
Alternative clinical diagnoses and epidemiological risk factors should be considered.
4. Action to take if inpatient definition is met
4.1 Isolation
Ensure the patient is placed in respiratory isolation or within a specified cohort bay and thePPE described in theinfection
prevention and control guidance is worn by any person entering the room.
Ensure that the patient, potentially contaminated areas, and waste are managed as per theinfection control guidance.
4.2 Sampling and testing
Arrange diagnostic sampling for individuals meeting theinpatient definition. Do not wait for results of local testing for other
pathogens before sending samples for SARS-CoV-2 testing.
Testing should be organised through the local hospital.How to arrange laboratory testingand the guidance for sampling
and diagnostic laboratories includes an overview of laboratory investigations and sample requirements.
Designated PHE regional laboratories, in addition to the Respiratory virus unit (RVU) Reference laboratory atPHE
Colindale, are able to carry out testing. See how to arrange laboratory testing.
Testing for respiratory viruses other than COVID-19 can be guided by the current epidemiology as noted in thenational flu
report . As of 19 March 2020, influenza positivity inGP surveillance was low. Therefore, seasonal influenza testing may
not be routinely required for non-hospitalised influenza-like illness patients. In the future, please refer to this bulletin to
ensure you are informed by the latest available data.
For hospitalised patients with an acute respiratory infection, whilst influenza activity remains low and international travel is
minimal, there is no need to screen every case for influenza at the same time as SARS-COV2 testing. Influenza testing
should be considered where SARS-CoV2 is negative, in severe infections and immunocompromised patients, and in other
cases where it is relevant for clinical management.
4.3 Reporting to PHE
The local PHE Health Protection Team should be informed of cases or situations relating to contextual settings:
2 or more cases (meeting thedefinition of a possible or confirmed COVID-19 case), from a long-term care facility
any case from a prison or prescribed place of detention
any outbreak in a hospital or healthcare setting
schools
other unusual scenarios
Laboratories performing testing must ensure that their localLIMS is set up to report daily toPHE by 7am.
In addition, any case meeting the criteria for avian influenza or MERS-CoV testing should be reported to the
local HPT.
4.4 Discharge of patients
If the patient is clinically well and suitable for discharge from hospital, they can be discharged after:
appropriate clinical assessment
risk assessment of their home environment and provision of advice aboutstaying at home
there are arrangements in place to get them home
People in hospital who are not confirmed to have COVID-19 can be discharged. Decisions about any follow-up will be on a
case by case basis.
4.5 Actions for PHE Health Protection Team
Enter relevant details on the HPZone system (using the specific topic ‘COVID-19’).
5. De-escalation of IPC measures in hospital
Decisions about de-escalation ofIPC measures on admitted patients who will remain in hospital should be made on a
case by case basis in discussion with local infection specialists.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
