1 | P a g e
Global Updates
As of 13 February 2020, 2:30 pm (IST)
India situation
Between 30 January and 03 February 2020, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) reported
three cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Kerala. These patients are in stable condition and
are being closely monitored in hospital isolation.
The Prime Minister's Office, MoHFW and the Cabinet Secretary are closely monitoring the emerging
situation on COVID-19 in India.
Government of India (GoI) has issued travel advisories requesting the public to refrain from travel to
China and that anyone with a travel history since 15 January 2020 from China will be quarantined on
return. Further, e-Visa facility for Chinese passport holders has been suspended and existing visas
(already issued) are no longer valid for any foreign national travelling from China to India.
2 | P a g e
As on 13 February 2020, a total of 251 447 passengers have been screened from 2 315 flights coming
from China, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, Singapore and Thailand. Screening of passengers has been
ongoing in 21 airports, 12 international seaports and border crossings particularly with Nepal.
Presently over 15 991 passengers are in home quarantine and 497 suspect cases are in facility
isolation in 34 States/Union Territories (UTs).
States have extended support to provide additional manpower to undertake screening and provide
other logistic support to airport public health officers. States that do not have airports or seaports,
such as Haryana and Chhattisgarh, have reported that special awareness drives have been initiated
at toll plaza, bus stations and railway stations.
Ministry of Tourism is coordinating with the Hotels Association in India to encourage wider self-
reporting by travelers visiting religious and other tourist places in identified states.
A total of 645 persons evacuated from Wuhan, have been quarantined at the camps maintained by
Armed Forces and ITBP. They all have been tested negative for COVID-19 and will be re-tested again
on completion of their quarantine period (14 days).
National Institute of Virology, Pune, of the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) is the apex
laboratory for reconfirmation of any positive samples as well as for the quality assurance of the testing
of samples for COVID-19. In addition, 13 Viral Research and Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs) and
National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), New Delhi are performing tests for the COVID-19. As
of 12 February 2020, 1 725 samples have been tested of which only 3 were positive.
A 24x7 Control Room has been made operational (011-23978046) and IEC materials are being widely
disseminated through various communications channels such as print, electronic and social media.
Situation in Kerala
In Kerala, the situation has stabilized with no new cases being detected since past one week. The
State has lifted the state calamity status on 7 February in a high-level meeting chaired by the Chief
Secretary. However, the state remains on guard and the surveillance strengthening, contact tracing,
isolation and response activities are ongoing.
As of 13 February, total of 2 455 passengers returning from China have been identified out of which
2 431 have been placed under home quarantine and 24 have been admitted to different health
facilities, where they are under medical observation. Till date, 389 samples of suspected cases have
been sent to NIV, of which 354 samples have been tested negative and the remaining test results are
pending.
The state and district control rooms in Kerala are activated and daily meetings are being held.
Additionally, the medical officers and junior nursing staff have been trained in surveillance and contact
tracing. For all 14 districts a Medical Board has been constituted with specialty experts to provide
effective care for the patients. There is ongoing work to strengthen professional bodies like Indian
Medical Association, Indian Academy of Pediatrics and Private Hospitals Association on surveillance,
infection prevention and control, and case management.
Ambulances have been identified in each district and are prepared to be available on call. Risk
Communications has been strengthened to address rumor, fake news and miscommunications.
Psychosocial support is being provided to families of suspected persons.
3 | P a g e
WHO Response
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) support at national level
WCO is closely working with National Centre for Diseases Control (NCDC) on disease surveillance,
with the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) on laboratory testing capacity, and the Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting on risk communications.
WCO is providing continuous updates and technical guidance on risk assessment, preparedness and
response to the Joint Monitoring Group on Emerging Diseases, which brings together line ministries
and agencies.
WCO is supporting ICMR on laboratory and research protocols and National AIDS Control
Organization on re-purposing of Antiviral drugs for COVID-19.
In addition, information on suspected cases is being shared immediately and those confirmed are
being reported to the global community as per the International Health Regulations, (IHR 2005). India
has duly reported COVID-19 cases as per the IHR (2005) through the IHR National Focal Point.
WHO coordination with UN partners
WCO India and UNICEF are supporting MoHFW for preparedness, response planning, development
of materials for risk communication and community engagement. UN country team, and health
partners are being regularly updated on COVID-19 outbreak by WCO.
WCO support in Kerala
WCO is closely working with the Principal Secretary, Directorate of Health Services and the Integrated
Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) and extending full support to the state and districts through
the extended network of WHO consultants working on Tuberculosis (TB), India Hypertension Control
Initiative (IHCI) and National Public Health Surveillance Project (NPSP).
• The WCO medical officers have been repurposed in states and districts. They are actively
supporting capacity building, coordination of meetings and attending to the state and district
control room support. A total of eight WHO consultants have been deployed in 14 districts of
Kerala for rapid response. WCO is supporting in strengthening surveillance and response
measures.
• WCO has shared updated technical information and facilitated partnerships with private
hospitals in Kerala to provide isolation facilities.
• Additional support provided to Kasaragod district to improve surveillance, contact tracing and
data analysis.
4 | P a g e
WCO support in other States
The WCO field teams have been engaged in Uttar Pradesh, where the block monitors were used for
passenger tracking and in other 26 states for response activities; supporting state and district control
rooms; and closely working with the Principal Secretary and MD-NHM. WCO is also engaged in
district task force meetings for enhanced surveillance and contact tracing.
The WCO field team are also supporting states in the tracking of the passengers, training medical
officers and rapid response teams, engaging with state and district officials of IDSP for coordination
and support, sharing daily updates at state and district level including with district magistrates and
translating COVID-19 guidance documents in local languages (for some states).
Airport assessments were conducted in some states jointly with government officials.
For more information contact:
Dr Tran Minh Nhu Nguyen Dr Ritu Chauhan
Team Lead National Programme Officer
WHO India WHO India
Email: tranminhn@who.int Email: chauhanr@who.int
