Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Environment Agency regulatory response to
coronavirus
Published 28 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Environment Agency regulatory response to coronavirus
The Environment Agency’s priority is to protect people and the environment and to support those we regulate.
We recognise the difficulties you are facing as a result of coronavirus (COVID-19). We expect you to take all reasonable
steps to comply with regulatory requirements, using contingency plans to help you comply. If it is not possible to comply
due to these exceptional circumstances, we expect you to:
Contents
COVID-19 regulatory position statements
Contact the Environment Agency
notify your usual regulatory contact
minimise any unavoidable non-compliance
minimise the effects of any unavoidable non-compliance
prioritise complying with regulatory requirements that directly protect the environment and human health
keep records showing why a non-compliance occurred, for example records of staff absences, contractors being
unavailable or supply chain failures
We recognise that because of the coronavirus outbreak, you may be unable to comply fully with your regulatory
requirements for reasons beyond your control. We will consider the appropriate enforcement response to any non-
compliance during this time in line with our Enforcement and sanctions policy and take into account:
the extent to which you have followed our expectations as set out above
the impact of coronavirus on your activities, which should be supported by your records showing why the non-
compliance occurred
the effect of any relevantCOVID-19 regulatory position statement
We will keep this approach under review in line with all of the following:
government guidance
the changing circumstances of the coronavirus outbreak
any other relevant factor
We will vary or withdraw this statement as appropriate.
COVID-19 regulatory position statements
We have also published some time limitedCOVID-19 regulatory position statements (RPSs) in relation to certain
regulatory requirements. They will help minimise risks to the environment and human health where, for reasons beyond
your control, compliance with certain regulatory requirements may not be possible due to coronavirus. They also cover
specific circumstances where we are relaxing normal regulatory requirements. This is to avoid increasing risks to the
environment or human health during the particular circumstances of the coronavirus outbreak.
Each COVID-19 RPS sets out when it applies and the conditions you must comply with. You must still comply with all your
other regulatory requirements.
If you wish to use a COVID-19RPS you must comply with both its:
specific conditions – including any requirements to notify us or get our approval to use it
requirements concerning pollution and harm to human health
If you do this, we will not normally take enforcement action against you.
Contact the Environment Agency
General enquiries
National Customer Contact Centre
PO Box 544
Rotherham
S60 1BY
Email
enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk
Telephone
03708 506 506
Telephone from outside the UK (Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm GMT)
+44 (0) 114 282 5312
Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm.
Due to the impact of COVID-19 on our teams you may experience some delays in responses as most of our staff will be working from
home. The best way to contact us is by email (enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk) rather than the postal address.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
The UK has left the EU
Transition period: get ready for 2021
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
