No. 4(2)/2020-SP-4
Govarnment of India
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution.
Department of Food & Public Distribution
Krishi Bhawan, New Delhi
‘March 9. 2020,
To
4. Chief Secretaries,
(All State Governments )
2. Administrators ofall UT Administrations
‘Subject: To enhance production of hand sanitizers and to ensure its availabilty to the

 

Sir/ Madam,

‘A number of measures have been taken both by Government of India and the State
Governments to contain Corona Virus / Covid 49. You are aware that in order to prevent
the spread of Corona virus, sanitizers are used by the public, health workers etc.

2. The demand of sanitizers is increasing day by day and in order to maintsin demand
‘Supply balance the State Government / UT Administrations are requested to take following
actions immediately

{l) Necessary permissions on account of licensing and storage of Ethyl Alcohol!
Extra Neutral Alcohal (ENA)! Ethanol may be accorded by fhe Stato
Government agencies to the sanitizer industries upto their installed capacity
‘without any quota restriction on supply of Ethyl AlcohoVENA,

 

(i) All possible arrangements should be made to ensure that Ethyl AlcohaVENA is
made easily available to the sanitizer industry. In this regard, Indian Sugar Mils,
‘Association (ISMA) and All India Disiileries Association (AIDA) have also
assured that the input material, ie., Ethyl Alcohol / ENA / Ethanol would be
made available tothe producers of sanitizers at a reasonable price.

 

(ii) The sanitizer industry operating in the States/ UT administrations should be
‘motivated to run their units in all three shifts, so that they can utlizo their
installed capacity to produce maximum quantity of hand sanitizers. Sanitizer
Industry should also be encouraged to enhance their production capacity; for
which necessary permissions may be accorded by the States/ UT
‘Administrations on priority basis.

{¥)_Ithas been brought to our notice by AIDA that their distlery members can also
produce sanitizer in bulk, that can be bolted by the Sanitizer Industry and other
Industries: for which necessary permissions. if required may be accorded by the
States/ UT Administrations on priority 0888.

3. This may be treated as “Most Urgent.

‘ours faithfully,

a 322
नि]
ein Secretary (Sugar 8 cn}
mal: -super@govin
Copy to:

Principal Secretaries of Canel Excise/Industries Departments of States

Indian Sugar Mills Association (Tel No.0-26262294, 25262295, 26262296)
All India Distllary Association (Tel.No.0t7-28432743)

‘Association of Indian Madical Deviea Industry (Tel No. 0729-4289000/40695)

Copy for information to:

Secretary, Dlo Food & Public Distribution

Secretary, Dio Consumer Affairs

‘Secretary, Mio Petroleum & Natural Gas

‘Secretary, Do Pharmaceuticals

Addl, Secretary (Shri A. Giridhar), Cabinet Secretariat

ear
(subodh Kumar Singh
Join Secretary (Sugar & Admin)
