Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Glossary of terms
Updated 4 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: infection prevention and control (IPC)
Public Health
England
Aerosol-generating procedures (AGPs)
Certain medical and patient care activities that can result in the release of airborne particles (aerosols).AGPs can create a
risk of airborne transmission of infections that are usually only spread by droplet transmission.
Airborne transmission
The spread of infection from one person to another by airborne particles (aerosols) containing infectious agents.
Airborne particles
Very small particles that may contain infectious agents. They can remain in the air for long periods of time and can be
carried over long distances by air currents. Airborne particles can be released when a person coughs or sneezes, and
during aerosol generating procedures (AGPs). ‘Droplet nuclei’ are aerosols formed from the evaporation of larger droplet
particles (see droplet transmission). Aerosols formed from droplet particles in this way behave as other aerosols.
Airborne precautions
Measures used to prevent and control infection spread without necessarily having close patient contact via aerosols (less
than or equal to 5μm) from the respiratory tract of one individual directly onto a mucosal surface or conjunctivae of
another individual. Aerosols can penetrate the respiratory system to the alveolar level.
BS/EN standards
Mandatory technical specifications created by either the British Standards Institute (BS) or European Standardisation
Organisations (EN) in collaboration with government bodies, industry experts and trade associations. They aim to ensure
the quality and safety of products, services and systems.
Cohort area
An area (room, bay, ward) in which 2 or more patients (a cohort) with the same confirmed infection are placed. A cohort
area should be physically separate from other patients.
Contact precautions
Measures used to prevent and control infections that spread via direct contact with the patient or indirectly from the
patient’s immediate care environment (including care equipment). This is the most common route of infection
transmission.
Contact transmission
Contact transmission is the most common route of transmission, and consists of two distinct types: direct contact and
indirect contact. Direct transmission occurs when microorganisms are transmitted directly from an infectious individual to
another individual without the involvement of another contaminated person or object (fomite). Indirect transmission occurs
when microorganisms are transmitted from an infectious individual to another individual through a contaminated object or
person (fomite) or person.
COVID-19
COVID-19 is a highly infectious respiratory disease caused by a novel coronavirus. The disease was discovered in China
in December 2019 and has since spread around the world.
Droplet precautions
Measures used to prevent and control infections spread over short distances (at least 1 metre or 3 feet) via droplets
(greater than 5μm) from the respiratory tract of one individual directly onto a mucosal surface or conjunctivae of another
individual. Droplets penetrate the respiratory system to above the alveolar level.
Droplet transmission
The spread of infection from one person to another by droplets containing infectious agents.
Eye or face protection
Worn when there is a risk from splashing of secretion (including respiratory secretions). Eye or face protection can be
achieved by the use of any one of the following:
a surgical mask with integrated visor
a full face visor or shield
polycarbonate safety spectacles or equivalent
Fluid-resistant (Type IIR) surgical face mask (FRSM)
A disposable fluid-resistant mask worn over the nose and mouth to protect the mucous membranes of the wearer’s nose
and mouth from splashes and infectious droplets. FRSMs can also be used to protect patients. When recommended for
infection control purposes a ‘surgical face mask’ typically denotes a fluid-resistant (Type IIR) surgical mask.
Fluid-resistant
A term applied to fabrics that resist liquid penetration, often used interchangeably with ‘fluid-repellent’ when describing the
properties of protective clothing or equipment.
Frequently touched surfaces
Surfaces of the environment which are commonly touched or come into contact with human hands.
Healthcare or clinical waste
Waste produced as a result of healthcare activities for example soiled dressings, sharps.
High-flow nasal cannula (HFNC) therapy
HFNC is an oxygen supply system capable of delivering up to 100% humidified and heated oxygen at a flow rate of up to
60 litres per minute.
Higher risk acute care area risk units
Intensive care units, intensive therapy units, high dependency units, emergency department resuscitation areas, wards
with non-invasive ventilation; operating theatres; endoscopy units for upper Respiratory, ENT or upper GI endoscopy; and
other clinical areas where AGPs are regularly performed.
Incubation period
The period between the infection of an individual by a pathogen and the manifestation of the illness or disease it causes.
Induction of sputum
Induction of sputum typically involves the administration of nebulised saline to moisten and loosen respiratory secretions
(this may be accompanied by chest physiotherapy (percussion and vibration)) to induce forceful coughing.
Infectious linen
Linen that has been used by a patient who is known or suspected to be infectious and or linen that is contaminated with
blood and or other body fluids, for example faeces.
Long term health condition
This covers:
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bronchitis, emphysema or asthma
heart disease
kidney disease
liver disease
stroke or a transient ischaemic attack (TIA)
diabetes
lowered immunity as a result of disease or medical treatment, such as steroid medication or cancer treatment
a neurological condition, such as Parkinson’s disease, motor neurone disease, multiple sclerosis (MS), cerebral palsy,
or a learning disability
any problem with the spleen, including sickle cell disease, or had spleen removed
a BMI of 40 or above (obese)
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Equipment a person wears to protect themselves from risks to their health or safety, including exposure to infection
agents. The level of PPE required depends on the:
suspected or known infectious agent
severity of the illness caused
transmission route of the infectious agent
procedure or task being undertaken
Respiratory droplets
A small droplet, such as a particle of moisture released from the mouth during coughing, sneezing, or speaking.
Respiratory protective equipment
Respiratory protection that is worn over the nose and mouth designed to protect the wearer from inhaling hazardous
substances, including airborne particles (aerosols). There are 2 types of respiratory protection that can be used, tight-
fitting disposable FFP respirators and loose-fitting powered hoods (TH2).
FFP stands for filtering face piece. There are three categories of FFP respirator: FFP1, FFP2 and FFP3. FFP3 and loose
fitting powered hoods provide the highest level of protection and are recommended when caring for patients in areas
where high risk aerosol generating procedures (AGPs) are being performed. Where the risk assessment shows an FFP2
respirator is suitable, they are recommended as a safe alternative. N95 respirators are tested against different standards
but are broadly equivalent to a FFP2.
Respiratory symptoms
Respiratory symptoms include:
rhinorrhoea (runny nose)
sore throat
cough
difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
Segregation
Physically separating or isolating from other people.
SARS-CoV
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus, the virus responsible for the 2003 outbreak of human coronavirus
disease.
SARS-CoV-2
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, the virus responsible for the 2019 outbreak of COVID-19 disease.
Standard infection control precautions (SICPs)
SICPs are the basic infection prevention and control measures necessary to reduce the risk of transmission of an
infectious agent from both recognised and unrecognised sources of infection.
Single room
A room with space for one patient and usually contains (as a minimum) a bed, a locker or wardrobe and a clinical wash-
hand basin.
Staff cohorting
When staff care for one specific group of patients and do not move between different patient cohorts. Patient cohorts may
include for example ‘symptomatic’, ‘asymptomatic and exposed’, or ‘asymptomatic and unexposed’ patient groups.
Transmission based precautions
Additional precautions to be used in addition to SICPs when caring for patients with a known or suspected infection or
colonisation.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
