Suggested citation: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Public health management of persons having had
contact with cases of novel coronavirus in the European Union, 25 February 2020. Stockholm: ECDC; 2020.
© European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, 2020
TECHNICAL REPORT
Public health management of persons, including
healthcare workers, having had contact with
COVID-19 cases in the European Union
25 February 2020
Background
Due to the rapidly evolving epidemiological situation regarding the epidemic of novel coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19), EU Member States now not only review their case management but also their approach towards
people who have been in contact with newly detected cases (‘contacts’). This document can be read together
with WHO’s guidance ‘Home care for patients with suspected novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infection presenting
with mild symptoms and management of contacts’ [1].
Scope of this document
This document aims to provide guidance for EU/EEA public health authorities on the management of persons,
including healthcare workers, who had contact with COVID-19 cases.
Target audience
Public health professionals and healthcare practitioners in EU/EEA Member States.
Purpose of contact management
The purpose of managing COVID-19 case contacts is:
• to identify symptomatic contacts as early as possible for isolation and treatment, and
• to facilitate prompt laboratory diagnostic testing.
Definition of contact persons
A contact of a COVID-19 case is a person not currently presenting symptoms, who has, or may have been in,
contact with a COVID-19 case. The associated risk of infection depends on the level of exposure, which will, in
turn, determine the type of monitoring. Establishing the level of exposure can be difficult and requires the case
to be interviewed.
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
2
1. High-risk exposure (close contacts*)
• A person living in the same household as a COVID-19 case
• A person having had direct physical contact with a COVID-19 case (e.g. shaking hands)
• A person having unprotected direct contact with infectious secretions of a COVID-19 case (e.g. being
coughed on, touching used paper tissues with a bare hand)
• A person having had face-to-face contact with a COVID-19 case within 2 metres [2] and > 15 minutes
• A person who was in a closed environment (e.g. classroom, meeting room, hospital waiting room, etc.)
with a COVID-19 case for 15 minutes or more and at a distance of less than 2 metres
• A healthcare worker (HCW) or other person providing direct care for a COVID-19 case, or laboratory
workers handling specimens from a COVID-19 case without recommended PPE or with a possible breach
of PPE [3]
• A contact in an aircraft sitting within two seats (in any direction) of the COVID-19 case, travel companions
or persons providing care, and crew members serving in the section of the aircraft where the index case
was seated [4] (if severity of symptoms or movement of the case indicate more extensive exposure,
passengers seated in the entire section or all passengers on the aircraft may be considered close
contacts)
2. Low-risk exposure (casual contact)
• A person who was in a closed environment with a COVID-19 case for less than 15 min or at a distance of
more than 2 metres
• A person having had face-to-face contact with a COVID-19 case for less than 15 min and at a distance of
less than 2 metres
• Traveling together with a COVID-19 case in any kind of conveyance.
Longer duration of contact increases the risk of transmission; the 15-minute limit is arbitrarily selected for
practical purposes. Based on individual risk assessments, public health authorities may consider expanding
contact tracing and management to persons who had a shorter duration of contact with a case.
Healthcare workers
Healthcare workers caring for COVID-19 patients in EU/EEA hospitals should be registered and monitored in
accordance with the occupational health procedures/routines in their country of practice. Based on the high risk
of healthcare-associated transmission, and in line with existing recommendations from other institutions [10], the
following specific measures are proposed for healthcare workers:
Unprotected contact (high-risk exposure):
• active monitoring for 14 days AND
• suspension from work for 14 days after last exposure
Protected contact wearing recommended PPE:
• self-monitoring and self-isolation if respiratory symptoms are experienced
• no suspension from work
Contact management steps after a case is
identified
Immediately after a case is confirmed, the next steps are:
• contact identification and listing; classification of the contact as having had high-risk exposure (‘close
contact’) or low-risk exposure
• contact tracing and assessment (i.e. communicate with contact persons and assess risk)
• contact management and follow-up (i.e. inform, advise, follow up – this includes testing if indicated)
• follow-up of contact tracing results by an outbreak control team.
* Adapted from Global Surveillance for human infection with coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) – Interim
guidance. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/global-surveillance-for-human-infection-with-
novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
3
Monitoring of contacts
Figure 1 describes the monitoring of contacts and the actions to be taken.
Depending on the specific situation, public health authorities can support, promote, or implement further
restrictions (e.g. voluntary limitation of contacts by the person, or avoiding contact with crowds) [5].
Contact tracing and management are based on the latest available knowledge, as outlined below.
• Current estimates suggest a median incubation period from five to six days, with a range of up to 14
days. A recent modelling study confirmed that it remains prudent to consider an incubation period of at
least 14 days [6,7].
• A case is believed to be most infectious when symptoms are present, but could possibly already be
infectious before the onset of symptoms.
• Transmission is believed to be mainly via respiratory droplets. At present, it is still unclear whether
airborne or faecal transmission is possible.
• Additional measures for healthcare workers are suggested, based on existing evidence of frequent
healthcare-associated (or ‘nosocomial’) transmission. In a series of 138 cases from Zhongnan Hospital in
Wuhan, hospital-associated transmission was suspected for 40 (29%) healthcare workers and 17 (12.3%)
hospitalised patients [9].
Main actions for contact persons
Contacts with high-risk exposure:
• active monitoring by public health authorities, for a period of 14 days after the last exposure
• daily monitoring for COVID-19 symptoms, including fever of any grade, cough or difficulty breathing
• avoid social contact
• avoid travel
• remain reachable for active monitoring.
Contacts with low-risk exposure:
• self-monitoring for COVID-19 symptoms, including fever of any grade, cough or difficulty breathing, for a
period of 14 days after the last exposure
• public health authorities may do more, depending on the specific situation.
Contacts, regardless of whether their exposure was high-risk or low-risk, should immediately self-isolate and
contact health services in the event of any symptom appearing within 14 days of the last exposure. If no
symptoms appear within 14 days of the last exposure, the contact person is no longer considered to be at risk of
developing COVID-19.
Implementation may be modified by public health authorities, depending on the risk assessment for individual
cases and their contacts.
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
4
Figure 1. Algorithm for the management of contacts of probable or confirmed COVID-19 cases
Contributing ECDC experts (in alphabetical order)
Cornelia Adlhoch, Agoritsa Baka, Orlando Cenciarelli, Pasi Penttinen, Daniel Palm, Diamantis Plachouras,
Emmanuel Robesyn, Gianfranco Spiteri, Carl Suetens, Phillip Zucs
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT Public health management of persons having had contact with cases of COVID-19 in the EU
5
References
1. World Health Organization (WHO). Home care for patients with suspected novel coronavirus (nCoV)
infection presenting with mild symptoms and management of contacts. Interim guidance. 2020 [updated
February 4; cited 2020 19 February]. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/home-care-
for-patients-with-suspected-novel-coronavirus-(ncov)-infection-presenting-with-mild-symptoms-and-
management-of-contacts.
2. Cowling BJ, Ip DKM, Fang VJ, Suntarattiwong P, Olsen SJ, Levy J, et al. Aerosol transmission is an
important mode of influenza A virus spread. Nature communications. 2013;4:1935.
3. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Infection prevention and control for the care
of patients with 2019-nCoV in healthcare settings 2020 [cited 2020 20 February]. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/infection-prevention-and-control-care-patients-2019-
ncov-healthcare-settings.
4. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Risk assessment guidelines for infectious
diseases transmitted on aircraft (RAGIDA) Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV)
2020 [updated January 2020]. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/infectious-diseases-transmitted-on-aircrafts-
ragida-risk-assessment-guidelines.pdf.
5. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Guidelines for the use of non-
pharmaceutical measures to delay and mitigate the impact of 2019-nCoV 2020 [cited 2020 20 February].
Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/novel-coronavirus-guidelines-
non-pharmaceutical-measures_0.pdf.
6. Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Epidemic update and risk assessment of 2019 Novel
Coronavirus 28 January 2020 2020 [cited 2020 20 February]. Available from:
http://www.chinacdc.cn/yyrdgz/202001/P020200128523354919292.pdf.
7. Backer JA, Klinkenberg D, Wallinga J. Incubation period of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infections
among travellers from Wuhan, China, 20–28 January 2020. Eurosurveillance. 2020;25(5):2000062.
8. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel
coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The Lancet. 2020 January 24.
9. Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X, Zhang J, et al. Clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with
2019 novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia in Wuhan, China. Jama. 2020.
10. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Interim U.S. Guidance for Risk Assessment and Public
Health Management of Healthcare Personnel with Potential Exposure in a Healthcare Setting to Patients
with 2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) 2020 [cited 2020 20 February]. Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/guidance-risk-assesment-hcp.html.
