Suggested citation: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and
monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases in the EU/EEA. ECDC: Stockholm; 2020.
© European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, 2020
ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT
Resource estimation for contact tracing,
quarantine and monitoring activities for
COVID-19 cases in the EU/EEA
2 March 2020
Scope of this document
This document aims to inform resource planning for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities
forCOVID-19 cases within European Union/European Economic Area (EU/EEA) Member States.
Definitions
As specified in the ECDC technical document ‘Public health management of persons, including healthcare workers,
having had contact with COVID-19 cases in the European Union’ [1] , a contact of a COVID-19 case is a person not
presenting symptoms, who has or may have been in contact with a COVID-19 case. The classification of contacts
as high-risk or low-risk exposure is based on the associated risk of infection that in turn determines the type of
monitoring. Contacts can also be healthcare workers as outlined in the technical document.
The definition of a contact applies to both probable and confirmed cases. A probable case is a suspected case for
whom testing for COVID-19 is inconclusive. Countries may decide to start contact investigation for confirmed cases
and, on an individual basis, for probable cases.
Quarantine of close contacts of a person with probable or confirmed infection refers to remaining at home or at a
designated setting for a defined period (e.g. for the incubation period) after the last exposure, aiming to reduce
virus transmission.
The term ‘isolation’ refers in this context to the separation of symptomatic contacts from other people, for example
at home or in hospital, while being tested for COVID-19 and awaiting the result.
Monitoring is used here to refer to the process whereby identified contacts are either actively followed up or
passively, through so-called self-monitoring, over a pre-defined period.
TECHNICAL REPORT Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases - EU/EEA
2
Methods
The following methods were used to identify relevant activities during contract tracing, isolation and management
of COVID-19 cases:
• Desk review of existing guidance documents, protocols, and peer-reviewed publications on contact tracing
related to COVID-19 or previous epidemics such as SARS, Ebola or pandemic influenza. Sources include
ECDC, the World Health Orgnization (WHO), US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) and
some EU/EEA countries.
• Consultations with country-level experts in person or via email to obtain information on country-
specific activities and resources needed.
• Consultation with ECDC experts with experience of contact tracing.
As a result of this process, the following types of activities were identified:
• Preparation;
• Contact identification;
• Isolation and monitoring of contacts with either high-risk or low-risk exposure to the index case;
• Testing of symptomatic contacts;
• Overall coordination of the response at local, national and international levels.
These activities were grouped into three categories:
• Coordination and management (ongoing through the whole duration of the outbreak);
• Initial set-up (one-time investment at the beginning of the outbreak management);
• Contact tracing, quarantine, monitoring, and testing of symptomatic contacts for each index case and its
contacts.
After identification of activities, we estimated the resources needed, informed by existing guidance documents and
the expert consultation [2-13].
Resource estimation for contact tracing,
quarantine and monitoring activities
The proposed resource estimation considers a preparation phase (describing set-up needs) and an operational
phase (describing resources needed per case).
The total amount of resources needed is the sum of different components:
• In the preparation phase:
− coordination teams set-up, such as the establishment of local, regional or national coordination
teams;
− resources needed for set-up, for example, a one-time investment to assure access to the equipment,
tools and infrastructure needed to manage the outbreak;
• In the operational phase:
− resources needed for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring contacts resulting from one case.
− coordination activities continue throughout the whole duration of the operational phase.
Preparation phase
A preparation phase with the set-up of coordination teams and physical resources is necessary so that contact
tracing can start immediately once a case is identified. The availability of resources and the extent to which
preparatory activities are needed will vary from country to country.
TECHNICAL REPORT Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases - EU/EEA
3
Coordination activities
National, regional and local coordination teams should ideally be established prior to cases occurring in EU/EEA
countries. These coordination teams are then expected to be operational during the entire duration of the
outbreak.
It is likely that contact tracing will require coordination across several local or regional public health jurisdictions, as
cases and contacts may be geographically dispersed.
The national team, the size of which will vary by the size of the country, and subsequently by the number of cases
and contacts, provides coordinated contact tracing activities across the country. It also produces guidance
protocols, questionnaires, databases and data analysis. International coordination may also be required if a case,
or its contacts, have travelled within or outside Europe.
The regional and local team coordinates the contact tracing activities at regional/local level. The number of local
teams, will increase with the spread of the outbreak.
Similarly, it is likely that if the number of cases rises, more staff at national or regional level will be needed as the
complexity of the contact tracing activities increases.
Resources needed for set-up
In the preparation phase, resources need to be invested to obtain the equipment, tools and infrastructure to start
contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring.
The availability of resources varies from country to country and in some cases, the set-up is minimal because some
procedures are already in place.
Examples of resources required:
• Training of staff: Staff at national and local level would need to be trained, e.g. training on how to conduct
a phone interview of cases/contacts, or training on the use of PPE for people testing symptomatic contacts.
It is estimated that for each training the following is needed: a trainer working eight hours to prepare the
training material, an administrative staff working four hours to organise the logistics, and four hours of both
the trainer and the participants for the training delivery.
• Set-up of call centres: a call centre with staff for contact tracing activities and available to contacts if they
become symptomatic (e.g. two phones and three staff working on shifts to cover weekends and evenings);
• Stocking and positioning PPE.
• Validated protocols and questionnaires for data collection (during phone interviews, for example).
• Set-up of a database to collect, collate and analyse all data obtained.
Operational phase
Contact identification
Immediately after a case is confirmed, the case should be interviewed and the contacts listed and classified as
high-risk exposure (‘close contact’) or low-risk exposure contacts. The team then communicates with all contacts to
inform and advise. High-risk exposure contacts will be actively monitored by public health authorities, whereas low-
risk exposure contacts should self-monitor for symptoms and avoid social contacts. Quarantine, including voluntary
quarantine, may be considered for high-risk exposure contacts [14]. If symptoms of illness occur, the contacts
should then self-isolate and seek medical advice [1], preferably by phone first.
The resources needed at the operational level are proportional to the numbers of cases investigated and contacts
traced. Table 1 provides an overview of human resources (hours per professional profile) and material per activity.
TECHNICAL REPORT Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases - EU/EEA
4
Table 1. Estimated resources needed for contact tracing
HCW= healthcare worker; min= minutes.
* Of note, confirmed cases of COVID-19 may be hospitalised, isolated and possibly in a critical condition. This could pose a
particular challenge for interviewing cases as it could be challenging to set-up a phone call or visit the case. Infection and
prevention control (IPC) staff at the hospital could assist by conducting the interview, if provided with a questionnaire by the
contact tracing team. However, IPC staff are not always available in all settings. Additionally, if hospital staff carries out the
interview with the case, the information gained during the interview has to be transferred to the contact tracing team in some
manner. In estimating staff time, only the time needed for the actual interview by a HCW is included, whether this HCW is part of
the contact tracing team or hospital staff. Friends or family members could assist in determining contacts of cases in critical
condition.
Quarantine and monitoring
Resources needed for implementation of quarantine and monitoring measures have been estimated separately for
contacts with high-risk exposure (Table 2) and with low-risk exposure (Table 3). No resources are needed for self-
quarantine, although some benefit can be provided e.g. delivery of food or medication (see ‘optional
supplementary activities and resources’ section for more details).
Table 2. Estimated resources needed for monitoring of close contacts with high-risk exposure
Activity Human resources Material
Staff profile Number of
staff
Time
(per
staff)
Daily call to monitor contact for duration of
follow-up (up to 14 days).
HCW/ public
health staff
One 10 min • Phone
• Questionnaire
• Translation services
if necessary
Daily database update on contact’s health
status for duration of follow-up (up to 14
days).
HCW/ public
health staff
One 10 min • Database
HCW= healthcare worker; min= minutes.
Activity Human resources Material
Staff profile Number
of staff
Time (per
staff)
Interview case (*) HCW/public
health staff
One Two hours • Phone
• Questionnaire
• Translation services
(if necessary)
Create contact list and retrieve personal
information. This may require collaboration with
other entities, including transport authorities,
companies, and hospitals.
Administrative
or other
services
One Six hours
Enter interview in the system (e.g. electronic
information system or excel file)
HCW/ public
health staff
One One hour • Database
Classification of contacts as high or low-risk
exposure; including prioritisation of whom to
contact.
Two HCW/
public health
staff
One
administrative
or other
services
Three Two hours
Initial interview by phone with contacts.
Through this interview, staff will establish the
contacts’ level of exposure, ask about symptoms
and other personal information. Staff will also
provide information about infection control
measures, symptom monitoring and other
precautionary measures.
HCW/ public
health staff
One 45 min. • Phone
• Questionnaire
Enter information from interview into database HCW/ public
health staff
One 15 min. • Database
TECHNICAL REPORT Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases - EU/EEA
5
Table 3. Estimated resources needed for monitoring of close contacts with low-risk exposure
Activity Human resources Material
Staff profile Number of
staff
Time
(per
staff)
Self-monitoring and reporting possible onset
of symptoms
HCW/ public
health staff
• Call centre in case of
questions
HCW= healthcare worker
Table 4 indicates the estimated resources need for testing of contacts who develop symptoms during the
monitoring period. Contacts may develop symptoms due to COVID-19 infection, or due to other infections such as
seasonal influenza or the common cold – the likelihood of which will vary depending on time of year and setting.
The proportion of contacts who will develop symptoms and who need to be evaluated and tested is unknown. The
estimate below refers to the resources needed to evaluate one symptomatic contact.
Table 4. Estimated resources needed to test one symptomatic contact*
Activity Human resources Material
Staff
profile
Number
of staff
Time
(per
staff)
Incoming call from symptomatic contact
(situation assessment)
HCW One 30 min. • Call centre
Ambulance/car for travel to symptomatic
contact’s home for testing
Driver
(optional)
One Three
hours
• Dedicated vehicle
(or ambulance if the case needs
transport to hospital).
Home testing (travel to house and
conducting the test)
HCW One Three
hours • One PPE [15], alcoholic
solution, test, package for
shipment, one extra pair of
gloves for packaging test.
• Courier transport for shipment
of test
• Laboratory services for testing
HCW= healthcare worker; min= minutes; PPE = personal protective equipment.
*Some countries may also decide to bring symptomatic contacts into healthcare facilities for testing. This would need similar
resources in terms of transport, staff time and testing, except that more than one HCW may be involved in a healthcare facility
and may need PPE.
If a contact tests positive for COVID-19, they become a case and a new round of contact tracing with associated
resources starts again for that case.
Summary of resources
An overview of the resources needed for contact tracing and follow-up of contacts is presented in Table 5. The
resources needed for the operational phase have been calculated with the assumption that the median number of
contacts exposed to each case is 90 and that, on average, 36 are high-risk exposure contacts [16]. Note that the
number of contacts can be highly variable per case.
TECHNICAL REPORT Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases - EU/EEA
6
Table 5. Summary of estimated resources needed
Human
resources
Material/infrastructure Comments
Preparation phase - throughout outbreak and scalable as cases increase
Coordination
activities
National team International and
national coordination,
guidance, protocols,
questionnaires,
databases and data
analysis
Size of national team will likely
be larger in bigger countries
and also increase as complexity
of outbreak increases with
number of cases and contacts
Local teams Lead contact tracing
activities locally
Number of local teams will
increase as locations with
cases and contacts increase
Preparation phase – set-up investment at the beginning
Training Training of staff at
national and local
level
Trainer: eight hours
(prepare the
training material)
An administrative
staff: four hours
(organise logistic)
Trainer and
participants: four
hours (training
delivery)
Set-up of call
centres
A call centre with staff for
contact tracing and
available to the contacts if
they become symptomatic
Data collection
instruments
Validated protocols and
questionnaires for data
collection
Database A database to collect,
collate and analyse all data
obtained.
Ideally, database accessible
from all regions involved to
manage contacts across
locations
PPE Stocking and positioning
PPE
Operational phase - scalable as cases increase
Contact
identification
Six to seven HCW/
public health staff
and/or
administrative or
other services (over
a 48 hour time
period)
HCW/ public health
staff /administrative
or other services:
eight hours
HCW/ public health
staff: 97 hours
Phones
Questionnaire
Translation services
Database
Assumption that the number
of contacts exposed to each
case is 90 [16]
High-risk
exposure
(close) contacts
isolation and
monitoring
Two HCW Two HCW/public
health staff working
on average six
hours a day for up
to 14 days
Phones
Questionnaire
Translation services
Database
Assumption that each case
has on average 36 high-risk
exposure contacts [16]
Low-risk
exposure
contacts
isolation and
monitoring
HCW administrative
or other services
(Same staff as
those working with
monitoring of high-
exposure contacts)
Staff time at call
centre if contacts
have questions (five
to ten minutes per
call)
Phones
Questionnaire
Translation services
Database
It is not possible to estimate
the proportion of contacts
who will call for questions.
However, since the expected
proportion is low, the staff
could be the same as those
monitoring the high-exposure
contacts
Testing of
symptomatic
contacts
One HCW
One driver
One HCW for three
and a half hours
One driver for three
hours
Call centre
Dedicated vehicle
PPE
Test
Packaging
Courier transport
Laboratory services
This is an estimate of the
needs for one symptomatic
contact. It is not possible to
estimate the proportion of
contacts who are likely to
become symptomatic
HCW= healthcare worker; PPE = personal protective equipment.
TECHNICAL REPORT Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases - EU/EEA
7
Options for higher-transmission scenarios
As cases increase it will become increasingly challenging to trace all contacts of cases. Contract tracing alone is
unlikely to control the outbreak and additional measures will be necessary [17] (consult ECDC guideline on non-
pharmaceutical measures [14]). The point at which extensive contact tracing becomes unsustainable due to limited
resources will vary between different countries in the EU/EEA. It must be emphasised, however, that there is still
value in tracing contacts even if not all contacts of each case are traced. This will help slow the spread of
infection and if, on average, less than one new case arises from each case, the outbreak can be contained [16],
[17] . In such a scenario, contact tracing and follow-up can be prioritised first to the highest-risk exposure contacts
of each case, which are usually the easiest to find, including HCWs or staff working with vulnerable populations,
followed by as many as possible of the low-risk exposure contacts. It may also be possible to use well-trained
junior or non-technical staff instead of HCWs and public health specialists for some of the contact tracing activities
to extend capacity. Healthcare workers and public health specialists may be better used elsewhere in the outbreak
response. Other measures that may help save resources include switching to self-monitoring for close contacts
instead of daily calls, or to use an app or other online tool for monitoring.
The resources needed for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring in a higher transmission scenario are as
described above. However, additional resources will be needed due to increased complexity of coordination and
management of increasing numbers of people presenting with symptoms to healthcare facilities. This includes use
of additional PPE for staff, and possible societal costs associated with quarantine of large numbers of contacts,
such as costs related to business losses or to the implications of closing healthcare facilities.
Furthermore, some countries may decide to invest more resources in testing the highest-risk exposure contacts
e.g. family members, children, and risk groups or to set-up hotlines to provide guidance and information to the
general public.
All these resources have not been estimated here and go beyond the scope of this evaluation, which has only
focused on contact tracing and management of contacts.
Considerations
Contact tracing efforts may have to be scaled up very quickly if the number of identified cases becomes large in a
short period of time as has been seen in some locations during this COVID-19 outbreak. This could happen if
several new cases are introduced simultaneously, or if there is a delay in cases being identified and isolated, and
community transmission has gone on for some time.
Modelling has shown that the probability of containing the outbreak with contact tracing, quarantine and
monitoring alone is lower the higher the number of initial cases introduced, and the longer the time between
symptom onset in new cases and their isolation [17].
In a scenario of widespread transmission contact tracing could still contribute to delaying the spread and reducing
the pressure on the healthcare system, but may not be feasible. Countries could consider focusing on contacts that
are healthcare workers or work with vulnerable populations. Please refer to the ECDC guidelines on non-
pharmaceutical measures to delay and mitigate the impact of COVID-19 for more information on measures to
undertake during the mitigation phase [14] .
TECHNICAL REPORT Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases - EU/EEA
8
Optional supplementary activities and
resources
A number of activities were identified that may not be essential to the process but could be considered if resources
are available:
• For contacts with high likelihood of being infected, organised quarantine can be considered. This could be
applied for example when a group of people are repatriated from areas with high prevalence or after
spending an extended period together in a closed environment.
• Very high-risk exposure contacts could be tested before developing symptoms. This could be considered for
family members for example. Additionally, testing of self-isolated contacts may also be considered (e.g.
swab test every three days).
• Provision of thermometers for contacts in order to measure their temperature.
• For people in quarantine:
− Financial compensation for lost income.
− Delivery of food and other essential items such as medication.
• Testing of asymptomatic contacts to gain knowledge about transmission dynamics, severity and clinical
spectrum. This would not be for the purpose of containment but to inform the response. WHO has
developed a protocol for testing the contacts of the ‘first few cases’ [6] .
Contributing ECDC experts (in alphabetical
order)
Cornelia Adlhoch, Agoritsa Baka, Scott Chiossi, Stefania De Angelis, Erika Duffell, Margot Einoder-Moreno, Lina
Nerlander, Daniel Palm, Senia Rosales-Klintz.
TECHNICAL REPORT Resource estimation for contact tracing, quarantine and monitoring activities for COVID-19 cases - EU/EEA
9
References
1. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Public health management of persons having had contact
with novel coronavirus cases in the European Union 2020 [updated 30 January 2020]. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid-19-public-health-management-contact-novel-
coronavirus-cases-EU.pdf
2. UK Government; Department of Health Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Team. UK Influenza Pandemic Preparedness
Strategy 2011 2011 [updated 10 November 2011]. Available from:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/213717/dh_131040.
pdf.
3. French Government; Secrétariat général de la défense et de la sécurité nationale. National influenza oandemic
prevention and response plan 2011. Available from: https://solidarites-sante.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/PlanPandemieGrippale-
Version_Anglais.pdf.
4. World Health Organisation (WHO). Home care for patients with suspected novel coronavirus (nCoV) infection presenting
with mild symptoms and management of contacts 2020 [updated 4 February 2020]. Available from: https://
www.who.int/publications-detail/home-care-for-patients-with-suspected-novel-coronavirus-(ncov)-infection-presenting-
with-mild-symptoms-and-management-of-contacts.
5. World Health Organisation (WHO). Household transmission investigation protocol for 2019-novel coronavirus (2019-
nCoV) infection 2020 [updated 25 January 2020]. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/household-
transmission-investigation-protocol-for-2019-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)-infection.
6. World Health Organisation (WHO). The First Few X (FFX) Cases and contact investigation protocol for 2019-novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infection 2020 [updated 29 January 2020]. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-
detail/the-first-few-x-(ffx)-cases-and-contact-investigation-protocol-for-2019-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)-infection.
7. World Health Organisation (WHO). Implementation and management of contact tracing for Ebola virus disease 2015.
Available from: https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/ebola/contact-tracing/en/.
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Guidance
for Community-Level Preparedness and Response to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) 2004 [updated 8
January 2004]. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/sars/guidance/b-surveillance/downloads/b-surveillance-full.pdf.
9. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Department of Health and Human Services. Fact Sheet: Isolation and
Quarantine 2004 [updated 20 January 2004]. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/sars/quarantine/fs-isolation.pdf.
10. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Department of Health and Human Services. Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) Risk Assessment and Public Health Management Decision Making 2020. Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/downloads/public-health-management-decision-making.pdf.
11. Spanish Government IdSCI. Procedimento de actuación frente a casos de infección por el nuevo coronavirus (SARS-
CoV-2) 2020 [updated 27 February 2020]. Available from:
https://www.mscbs.gob.es/profesionales/saludPublica/ccayes/alertasActual/nCov-
China/documentos/Procedimiento_COVID_19.pdf.
12. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Health emergency preparedness for imported cases of
high-consequence infectious diseases 2019 [updated 22 october 2019]. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/health-emergency-preparedness-imported-cases-high-consequence-
infectious-diseases.
13. Stoecklin SB, Rolland P, Silue Y, Mailles A, Campese C, Simondon A, et al. First cases of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) in France: surveillance, investigations and control measures, January 2020. Eurosurveillance.
2020;25(6):2000094.
14. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Guidelines for the use of non-pharmaceutical measures to
delay and mitigate the impact of 2019-nCoV 2020 [updated February 2020]. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/novel-coronavirus-guidelines-non-pharmaceutical-
measures_0.pdf.
15. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). Personal protective equipment (PPE) needs in healthcare
settings for the care of patients with suspected or confirmed novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) 2020 [updated February
2020]. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/novel-coronavirus-personal-protective-
equipment-needs-healthcare-settings.pdf.
16. Keeling MJ, Hollingsworth TD, Read JM. The Efficacy of Contact Tracing for the Containment of the 2019 Novel
Coronavirus (COVID-19). medRxiv. 2020.
17. Hellewell J, Abbott S, Gimma A, Bosse NI, Jarvis CI, Russell TW, et al. Feasibility of controlling 2019-nCoV outbreaks by
isolation of cases and contacts. medRxiv. 2020.
