As on 10-03-2020
Government of India
Ministry of Health & FW
Additional Travel Advisory (I) for COVID-19 on Home Isolation
More than 100 countries across the world now have reported cases of COVID-19.
People traveling to these countries or people who have travelled abroad might possibly
have come in contact with people affected with COVID-19 during their stay or even
while in transit at the airports. Within these countries, few countries have reported
very large number of cases and deaths putting passengers from these countries
particularly at higher risk of infection.
Accordingly, in addition to the consolidated travel advisory issued on 6th
March, 2020,
the following are advised:
i. All incoming international passengers returning to India should self-monitor
their health and follow required Do’s and Dont’s as detailed by Government.
ii. Further, all passengers having travel history to China, Hong Kong, Republic of
Korea, Japan, Italy, Thailand, Singapore, Iran, Malaysia, France, Spain and
Germany are advised to undergo self-imposed quarantine for a period of 14
days from the date of their arrival. If such passengers are working in some
organizations/institutions, their respective employers are advised to facilitate
work from home during this period.
iii. With respect to restrictions on visa, besides the already issued instructions, all
regular Visas (including e Visas) which have been granted to nationals of
France, Germany and Spain on or before 11.03.2020 and where these foreigners
have not yet entered India stands suspended.
iv. Regular visas (including e Visas) granted to all foreign nationals who have
travel history to these countries on or after 1.2.2020 and who have not yet
entered India also stands suspended.
v. Visas of all foreigners already in India remain valid and they may contact the
nearest FRRO/FRO through e-FRRO module for extension/conversion etc of
their visa or grant of any consular service, if they choose to do so.
A detailed notification to this effect is being issued by the Bureau of
Immigration (BOI).
