Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
DATA AS REPORTED BY THE THAI MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH
WHO Thailand Situation Report
28 APRIL 2020
THAILAND
SITUATION IN THE
PAST 24 HOURS
Confirmed cases
(7 new)
2,938
Deaths
(2 new)
54
Hospitalized
232
Health care staff
infected
101
Recovered
2,652
HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 28th
of April 2020, seven new cases of
laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 were announced
by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand,
bringing the total number of cases to 2,938.
• Of these, more than 90% (2,652) have recovered,
about 1.8% (54) have died, and about 8% (232) are
receiving treatment.
• Five of the new cases (reported in Bangkok,
Phuket, Nakorn Ratchasrima) are close contacts of
previously confirmed cases.
• An analysis of data of COVID-19 patients between
January and 26th April shows that:
11% of all the patients are aged 60 and above
Major risk factors among this group involve attending
religious events (24%), associated with boxing stadia (24%),
had contact with confirmed cases (18%)
Yala, Phuket, Pattani (all in the south of Thailand) are the
three provinces with the highest infection rate per 100,000
older persons aged 60 and above
The percentage of deaths among COVID-19 patients aged
60 and above is 6.4%
The ratio of death between men and women is 2.3:1
• The Civil Aviation Authority of Thailand will restrict
international commercial flights entering the
country between 4th April and 31st May.
• The cabinet has approved the extension of the
emergency decree until the end of May.
• The government has formed a working group to
consider the way forward on relaxing measures.
• Directives will be adjusted using a phased, gradual
approach. New phase will be introduced at 14 day
intervals to allow monitoring and assessment.
UPDATE FROM THE MINISTRY
OF PUBLIC HEALTH
The Department of Disease Control’s
recommendations for the next phase of managing
the COVID-19 response are premised on the notion
that elimination of COVID-19 is difficult to achieve, but
keeping transmission at a controlled level is feasible.
The level of risk of a new outbreak is linked to the
ability of people to maintain physical distancing.
1. Public health measures will include:
• Enhanced surveillance – active case finding
in communities among people with mild
symptoms, pneumonia patients and healthcare
workers with respiratory symptoms
• Case investigation – case finding, contact
tracing, quarantine.
• Management of those at a higher risk of death
– such as older persons
• Preparedness and management of the
treatment and care system
• Management of mental health
• Prevention of infection in hospitals
2. Maintaining preparedness of the emergency
management system in collaboration with
Department of Disaster Prevention and Mitigation
3. Promoting health literacy on COVID-19 prevention
and control
4. Promoting personal hygiene practices
5. Physical distancing in public sphere
Additional measures
6. Travel restrictions (domestic and international) will
remain in place
7. Curfew will continue.
The steps
WHAT THEY ARE?
These are criteria that any country should use to keep
transmission of COVID-19 low and at manageable levels.
These steps can help countries gradually lift restrictions in phases.
This will allow some resumption of economic and social life, while
minimizing the risk of disease.
WHY ARE THEY IMPORTANT?
The six criteria outline what should be in place before transitioning
away from these measures currently in place, such as physical
distancing and “shutdowns”.
This “slow and strategic” response is necessary because the virus
spreads rapidly and outbreaks can occur quickly.
There are no new vaccines or medicines to prevent or treat
COVID-19. Physical distancing measures and movement
restrictions are effective in slowing the spread of the virus by
limiting contact between people. If these measures are lifted
too early or too quickly it is likely to lead to a sharp increase in
COVID-19 cases.
WHAT THEY ARE NOT.
These six steps do not guarantee that COVID-19 will not re-
emerge or increase. Without vaccines or medicines, our societies
must balance the need and hardship of physical distancing
measures to control COVID-19 and the need to resume important
activities in our lives. As these six criteria are applied, decisions
about when and where to move away from restrictions should
be based on real time assessments of disease activity. Measures
should be lifted in a phased, step-by-step manner.
“Why can’t we just lift the lockdown?”
Speculation about lifting of restrictions that are currently in place to limit the spread
of the COVID-19 virus is hot topic in media. It is important that restrictions are lifted
slowly and strategically, with a tapering off of restrictions that will hopefully avoid a
new cycle of outbreaks.
“While COVID-19 accelerates very fast, it decelerates much more slowly,” warns
WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. “We need to be aware that
measures such as physical distancing only slow the spread of the virus’ spread, but
do not eradicate it.”
Even after cases peak or reach low levels, we will not be able to return to normal, and
will need to keep adjusting our strategies according to the latest evidence. “These
decisions should be based on human health and guided by how the virus behaves,”
said Dr Tedros. “Our global connectedness means the risk of re-introduction and
resurgence of the disease will continue.” We need to prepare for a “new normal’
which will require all of us to change our behaviours for the foreseeable future.
6
World Health Organization Country Office for Thailand
4th
Floor Permanent Secretary Building 3
Ministry of Public Health, Nonthaburi Thailand 11000
Media queries: sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
www.who.int/thailand WHOThailand @WHOThailand @WHOThailand
1
Transmission of the
coronavirus is under
control.
The World Health
Organization has
outlined six criteria
that each country
should meet before
lifting restrictions:
The health system is able
to detect, test, isolate and
treat every case and trace
every contact.
2
The risk of outbreak
hotspots is minimized in
vulnerable settings like
health facilities.
3
Workplaces, schools
and other essential
places have preventative
measures in place.
4
Measures are in place
to manage the risk of
importing new cases.
5
Communities are fully
educated, engaged and
empowered to adjust to
the new norms.
6
World Health Organization Country Office for Thailand
4th
Fl. Permanent Secretary Building 3
Ministry of Public Health, Nonthaburi Thailand 11000
Media queries: sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English
• Regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand
• Global figures and technical advice from WHO
USEFUL
LINKS
www.who.int/thailand WHOThailand @WHOThailand @WHOThailand
What who is doing to provide support to Thailand
WHO Thailand is in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai
Government through the Ministry of Public Health, sharing
information on key developments, guidelines and scientific
updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with
key partners and the Ministry of Public Health to support migrant
populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and
advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand.
Media
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly
provide content on all aspects of the outbreak in Thailand
and around the world. Media queries can be directed to
sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
ADVICE FOR
THE PUBLIC
Media all over the world are
buzzing with speculation about
when restrictions could be eased,
shutdowns ended and economies
reopened.
Read our short explainer to
understand what needs to be
in place before this can happen
and why we can’t “just lift the
lockdown”.
