Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Directorate General of Health Services
[Emergency Medical Relief]
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for
transporting a suspect/confirmed case of COVID-19
1. About this SOP
This SOP is applicable to current phase of COVID-19 pandemic in India (local
transmission and limited community transmission), wherein as per plan of action, all
suspect cases are admitted to isolation facilities. These procedures are meant to guide
and be used for training ambulance drivers and technicians in transporting COVID-
19 patients. These also aim to support programme officers in monitoring
functionality and infection prevention protocols of the ambulances.
2. Introduction
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses, some causing illness in people and
others that circulate among animals, including camels, cats and bats. In humans, the
transmission of COVID-19 can occur via respiratory droplets directly (through
droplets from coughing or sneezing) or indirectly (through contaminated objects or
surfaces). The people most at risk of COVID-19 infection are those who are in close
contact with a suspect/confirmed COVID-19 patient and those who care for such
patients.
3. Transportation of patients
Ideally, there should be ambulances identified specifically for transporting COVID
suspect patients or those who have developed complications, to the health facilities.
Currently, there are two types of ambulances – ALS (with ventilators) and BLS
(without ventilators). States may empanel other ambulances having basic equipment
like that of BLS and use it for COVID patients. However, this must be ensured that
strict adherence to cleaning and decontamination protocols given here in the
guidance note need to be followed. The fleet in - charge or person designated by
CMO/CS, will supervise its adherence.
Call centres after receiving the call will try to triage the condition of the patient and
accordingly dispatch either ALS, BLS or other registered ambulances. However,
please ensure that 102 ambulances should not be used for corona patients and should
only be used for transporting pregnant women and sick infants. Ambulance staff
(technicians as well as drivers) should be trained and oriented about common signs
and symptoms of COVID-19 (fever, cough and difficulty in breathing). A sample
questionnaire to identify COVID-19 cases is placed at Annexure I. They should also
be aware about common infection, prevention and control practices including use of
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). Both the EMT and driver of ambulance will
wear PPE while handling, managing and transporting the COVID identified/ suspect
patients. Similar use of PPE is to be ensured by the health personnel at receiving
health facility. Patient and attendant should be provided with triple layer mask and
gloves. Simple public health measures like hand hygiene, respiratory etiquettes, etc.
need to be adhered by all.
3.1 Call Centre: On receiving the call, the call centre needs to enquire following details:
a) Demographic details of the patient i.e. name, age, gender etc.
b) To ascertain whether the patient is suspect case of COVID-19
i. Symptoms of patient: Ask whether the patient is suffering from
fever, cough and difficulty in breathing
ii. Whether patient has recently returned from a foreign country
iii. Whether the patient was under home quarantine as directed by local
health administration
c) Clinical condition of patient to be transported: whether stable or critical
3.2 In case of an inter-facility transfer, the casualty medical officer of the referring
hospital has to ensure that bed is available in referral hospital with supporting
equipment and needs to convey the same while making the call.
3.3 Assign the job to nearest ambulance with dedicated facility at strategic locations as
mentioned in the box above.
3.3.1 Check for state of preparedness of ambulance: Annexure II
3.3.2 Ensure PPE for ambulance staff: Annexure III
Augmenting the capacity of ambulances in districts
Local authorities should prepare a line list of all private ambulance service
providers in their respective areas. These ambulances should be linked with
centralized call centre so as to ensure adequate number of ambulances based on
population and time to care approach (Avg. response time of 20 minutes).
Orientation on Infection Prevention Protocols and protocols for transporting
COVID patients should also be ensured for staff of these ambulances. To ensure
response time of 20 minutes, ambulances should be strategically located at
hospitals, police stations.
Only identified and designated ambulances should be used for transportation.
People, health functionaries, nursing homes, private clinics, hospitals should be
made aware to use ambulance services for COVID patients being provided through
toll free numbers. Otherwise it might increase the chances of transmission of
infection. Every district should facilitate empaneling of ambulances other than
those in the public health system even if the present situation may not require
using them. To minimize the risk of transmission, it is strongly recommended that
if other than empaneled ambulances are bringing COVID or suspect patients, such
vehicles need to be quarantined for thorough cleaning and disinfection and should
only be released after certification by district administration/ district health official.
3.4 Both call centre and ambulances should always keep the updated list of available
hospitals and beds.
3.5 On receiving the call, from the call centre and prior to shifting the patient, EMT will
perform following:
3.5.1 the EMT will seek the above mentioned details again to ensure whether
the patient is a suspect case of COVID-19.
3.5.2 The EMT will wear the appropriate PPE.
3.5.3 The EMT shall assess the condition of the patient
3.5.4 If the patient is ambulatory and stable, he/she may be asked to board the
ambulance otherwise the EMT (while using the prescribed PPE) may
assist loading of patient.
3.5.5 Only one caregiver should be allowed to accompany the patient (while
using the prescribed PPE).
3.5.6 EMT should also ensure availability and provision of adequate triple
layered mask and gloves for patient and/or attendant.
3.5.7 The patient and the care giver will be provided with a triple layer medical
mask.
3.5.8 EMT will contact the identified health facility for facility preparedness
and readiness.
3.6 Management on board
3.6.1 Measure vitals of patient and ensure patient is stable.
3.6.2 If required, give supplementary O2 therapy at 5 L/min and titrate flow
rates to reach target SpO2 ≥90%.
3.6.3 If patient is being transported on ventilator to a higher center, follow
ventilator management protocols, provided the EMT is either trained or
assisted by a doctor well versed in ventilator management.
3.7 Handing over the patient
3.7.1 On reaching the receiving hospital, the EMT will hand over the patient
and details of medical interventions if any during transport. After handing
over the patient, the PPEs will be taken off as per protocol followed by
hand washing. Use Alcohol based rub /soap water for hand hygiene.
3.7.2 The biomedical waste generated (including PPE) to be disposed off in a
bio-hazard bag (yellow bag). Inside would be sprayed with Sodium
Hypochlorite (1%) and after tying the exterior will also be sprayed with
the same. It would be disposed off at their destination hospital. This shall
again be followed by hand washing.
3.8 Disinfection of ambulance
3.8.1 All surfaces that may have come in contact with the patient or materials
contaminated during patient care (e.g., stretcher, rails, control panels,
floors, walls and work surfaces) should be thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected using 1% Sodium Hypochlorite solution. (see Annexure – IV
for preparation of 1% Sodium hypochlorite solution)
3.8.2 Clean and disinfect reusable patient-care equipment before use on
another patient with alcohol based rub.
3.8.3 Cleaning of all surfaces and equipment should be done morning, evening
and after every use with soap/detergent and water.
3.9 Capacity building
District Authorities to ensure capacity building of EMT and driver on following areas:
3.9.1 Donning and doffing of PPE
3.9.2 Infection prevention protocols given in this guideline (Annexure V)
3.9.3 Triaging and identifying COVID-19 suspects based on their signs and
symptoms.
3.9.4 Similarly, emergency staff of health facility should also be trained in
segregation, isolation and management of COVID-19 patients. They
should not be mixed with other patients.
3.10 Monitoring
A checklist for weekly monitoring by District Surgeon/ Anesthetist is at Annexure VI
Annexure I
Question Response
Has someone in your close family
returned from a foreign country
Yes/No
Is the patient under home quarantine as
advised by local health authority?
Yes/No
Have you or someone in your family
come in close contact with a confirmed
COVID-19 patient in the last 14 days?
Yes/No
Do you have fever? Yes/No
Do you have cough? Yes/No
Do you have sore throat? Yes/No
Do you feel shortness of breath? Yes/No
Annexure II
Checklist for list of consumables, equipment
S. No. Item Available
(Yes/No)
If yes,
whether
functional
Remarks:
quantity, expiry,
last inspection
date etc.
1 Stretcher trolley (foldable)
2 Vital sign monitor
2.1  NIBP
2.2  SPO2
2.3  ECG
3 Ventilator with O2 Source
4 Defibrillator with battery
5 Syringe infusion pump
6 Ventimask with O2 flowmeter
7 Ambu bag with face mask
8 Laryngoscope with batteries
9 ETT with oro-pharyngeal airway
10 Suction apparatus with suction
and catheter
11 Emergency drug tray
12 IV Fluids
13 Nebulizer
14 Any other items:
14.1  Foleys catheter
14.2  ECG Electrode
14.3  IV Cannula
Annexure III
Rational use of PPE by ambulance staff*
Activity Risk Recommended
PPE
Remarks
Transporting
patients not on
any assisted
ventilation
Moderate
risk
N-95 mask
Gloves
Management of
SARI patient
while transporting
High risk Full complement of
PPE
When aerosol
generating
procedures are
anticipated
Driving the
ambulance
Low risk Triple layer medical
mask
Gloves
* The training of EMTs on COVID-19 will strictly adhere to the above mentioned
rational use of PPE (the above recommendation is by an expert group (including WHO)
and recommended by Joint Monitoring Group under DGHS available at
www.mohfw.gov.in)
Annexure IV
Guidelines for Preparation of 1% sodium hypochlorite solution
Product Available chlorine 1percent
Sodium hypochlorite – liquid bleach 3.5% 1 part bleach to 2.5 parts water
Sodium hypochlorite – liquid 5% 1 part bleach to 4 parts water
NaDCC (sodium dichloro-
isocyanurate) powder
60% 17 grams to 1 litre water
NaDCC (1.5 g/ tablet) – tablets 60% 11 tablets to 1 litre water
Chloramine – powder 25% 80 g to 1 litre water
Bleaching powder 70% 7g g to 1 litre water
Any other As per manufacturer’s Instructions
Annexure V
Infection Prevention for Pre-hospital Care
1.1. General
Ambulance or emergency health care workers are exposed to many
infectious agents during their work. Transmission of infectious disease can occur
while providing emergency care, rescue and body recovery/removal. Effective
infection prevention and control is central to providing high quality health care
for patients and a safe working environment for those that work in healthcare
settings. Implementation of good infection control practices help to minimize the
risk of spread of infection to patients and staff.
Pre-hospital care need to have an infection prevention program to monitor
for HAIs (Healthcare Associated Infections) and prevent the spread of
diseases/infection.
1.2. Standard Precautions
Standard precautions are based on the principle that all blood, body fluids,
secretions, excretions (except sweat), non-intact skin, and mucous membranes
may contain transmissible infectious agents. These set of measures are intended
to be applied to the care of all patients in all healthcare settings, regardless of the
suspected or confirmed presence of an infectious agent. Standard precautions
include:
 Hand hygiene
 Use of barrier precautions or personal protective equipment
 Safe injection practices
1.2.1. Hand Hygiene
Hand hygiene is the single most important practice to reduce the
transmission of infectious agents in healthcare settings. The term “hand
hygiene” includes both hand washing with either soap and water, and use of
alcohol-based products (gels, rinses, foams) that do not require the use of
water. It is important to ensure the availability of hand rub products at all
times in the ambulance to ensure hand hygiene compliance.
1.2.2. Use of barrier precautions or Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
COVID-19 is primarily a droplet transmitted infection, with indirect
transmission through fomites/contaminated surfaces/objects. The standard
precautions on use of personal protective equipment, as per the risk profile are
given in annexure III.
The Healthcare worker must possess knowledge and skill regarding
use and removal of the PPE after its use.
1.3. Equipment disinfection:
Equipment and surfaces are contaminated if they have come in contact
with patient’s skin, blood or body fluids. These can spread infection.
Therefore, it is mandatory that these are cleaned and disinfected using 1%
sodium hypochlorite or alcohol based disinfectants at least once daily and
after every patient contact. Patient care items and surfaces that can contribute
to the spread of infection include:
 Stethoscopes
 Blood pressure cuffs
 Monitors
 Stretchers, backboards, and immobilization devices
 Laryngoscope blades
 Radios/mobiles
 Shelves
 Door handles
 Other items and surfaces in ambulance or transport vehicle
1.4. Decontamination of ambulance:
 Decontamination of ambulance needs to be performed every time a
suspect/confirmed case is transported in the ambulance. The following
procedure must be followed while decontaminating the ambulance:
 Gloves and N-95 masks are recommended for sanitation staff cleaning the
ambulance.
 Disinfect (damp wipe) all horizontal, vertical and contact surfaces with a
cotton cloth saturated (or microfiber) with a 1% sodium hypochlorite
solution. These surfaces include, but are not limited to: stretcher, Bed
rails, Infusion pumps, IV poles/Hanging IV poles, Monitor cables,
telephone, Countertops, sharps container. Spot clean walls (when visually
soiled) with disinfectant-detergent and windows with glass cleaner. Allow
contact time of 30 minutes and allow air dry.
 Damp mop floor with 1% sodium hypochlorite disinfectant.
 Discard disposable items and Infectious waste in a Bio/Hazard bag. The
interior is sprayed with 1% sodium hypochlorite. The bag is tied and
exterior is also decontaminated with 1% sodium hypochlorite and should
be given to the hospitals to dispose of according to their policy.
 Change cotton mop water containing disinfectant after each cleaning
cycle.
 Do not place cleaning cloth back into the disinfectant solution after using
it to wipe a surface.
 Remove gloves and wash hands.
Annexure VI
Checklist for Monitoring
Weekly monitoring by District Surgeon/ Anesthetist to be ensured. Following parameters
to be monitored:
1. Daily stock-check & functionality test of critical equipment (Oxygen, Suction,
etc.)
2. Decontamination & Disinfection Protocols – before and after transporting
COVID patients
3. Waste Management – Segregation, General Waste, BMW, Liquid Waste, etc.
4. Spill Management
5. Linen Management
6. Patients’ property
7. ‘End of Life’ care
8. Fire Safety
9. Outcome –
1. Deaths while transporting
2. Death after reaching the facility
3. No. of successful resuscitation (return to spontaneous circulation after
cardiac arrest)
4. IV Fluid Usage Rate – Number of Units (1 unit = 500 ml) transfused/
Patients transported
5. Percentage of cases, reporting more than 95% Oxygen Saturation level
on arrival
6. Incidence of Aspiration Pneumonia
7. Service Experience (Feed-back Score on Likert scale 1-5)
