CORONAVIRUS
STAY AT HOME
PROTECT THE NHS
SAVE LIVES
Large print version
1
Coronavirus
Stay at home
Protect the NHS
Save lives
Information from the UK Government.
Stay at home
The single most important action you can take
is to stay at home in order to protect the NHS
and save lives.
You should only leave the house for very limited
reasons:
• Shopping for basic necessities, for example food
and medicine, as infrequently as possible.
• One form of exercise a day, for example a run, walk,
or cycle – alone or with members of your household.
• Any medical need, including to donate blood,
avoid risk of harm, provide care or help a
vulnerable person.
• Travelling for work purposes, but only where you
cannot work from home.
2
These are exceptions – and when doing these
activities, you should minimise time spent outside of
the home and ensure you are two metres apart from
anyone outside of your household.
Critical workers, and parents of vulnerable children,
may leave the house to take their children to and
from school or their childcare provider. More detail
is available online. Children can be moved between
homes if their parents live separately.
Help stop the infection spreading
and support each other
• Wash your hands with soap and water often –
do this for at least 20 seconds.
• Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue or your
sleeve (not your hands) when you cough or sneeze.
• Put used tissues in the bin immediately and wash
your hands afterwards.
• Don’t touch your eyes, nose or mouth if your hands
are not clean.
• Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces
and objects in your home, such as door handles
and taps.
• Shop responsibly, follow advice in stores, and only
buy what you need for yourself and your family,
and those you’re supporting.
3
How to wash your hands with soap
and water for at least 20 seconds
• Wash your hands palm to palm.
• Wash the backs of your hands.
• Wash in between the fingers.
• Wash the back of the fingers.
• Wash the thumbs.
• Wash the tips of the fingers.
4
Symptoms
You may have coronavirus if you have either of the
following symptoms, however mild:
• a high temperature.
• a new, continuous cough.
Anyone who has these symptoms must stay at home
until the symptoms have ended, and in all cases for
at least seven days. Everyone else in the household
must stay at home for at least 14 days after the first
person’s symptoms appear, even if they themselves
do not have symptoms.
If anyone else develops symptoms during that time,
that individual must stay home for an additional seven
days from when they developed symptoms. Once
seven days have passed and provided symptoms
have ended, they no longer need to isolate.
Do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital.
Use NHS online services. Only call 111 if you are
not able to get online, you have been instructed
to call, or your symptoms worsen.
If you have difficulties communicating or hearing,
you can call 18001 111 on a textphone or access the
NHS 111 British Sign Language (BSL) interpreter
service through www.nhs.uk/111
5
Call 999 if you have a serious or life-threatening
emergency, and tell the call adviser if you have
coronavirus symptoms.
You can text the emergency services on 999
but you need to register your phone in advance.
To find out more go to emergencysms.net
An example of how coronavirus can
spread in a household
Person A develops symptoms, triggering 7 days
of isolation for herself and 14 days for others in
her household.
Person A’s isolation ends after 7 days, if her
symptoms have stopped.
From the time Person A first develops symptoms:
• Person B develops symptoms on Day 3 so they
must isolate for 7 days from Day 3.
• Person B’s isolation ends on Day 10, as long as
their symptoms have stopped by Day 9.
• Person C has no symptoms so their 14-day
isolation ends on Day 15.
• Person D develops symptoms on Day 13.
Their 7-day isolation starts on Day 13.
• Person D’s isolation ends on Day 20, as long as
their symptoms have stopped by Day 19.
6
Advice for those who are 70 and over,
have an underlying health condition
or are pregnant
People who are 70 and over, or those who have
an underlying health condition, are likely to be
more seriously affected. It is even more important
that you protect yourself now by following the advice
in this leaflet.
If you are at very high risk due to a serious underlying
health condition, you should have already received a
letter from the NHS containing specific guidance about
what to do.
If you need shopping or medication, ask family, friends
or neighbours to drop these at the door, or if possible,
order online. Use NHS online services or the NHS App
to book appointments or order repeat prescriptions –
only phone if this is not possible.
GP consultations should be done over the phone or
online, to minimise risk to you and other patients.
GP practices may postpone non-urgent health checks
or routine appointments.
There is helpful information and advice for pregnant
women about coronavirus on the Royal College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists’ website.
7
Support for businesses and workers
The Government knows that all these measures have
a huge impact on businesses, households and people
across the country and has taken action to protect
lives and incomes.
For businesses:
• More than £330bn is being made available in loans
and guarantees.
• Another £20bn is being given to businesses
through tax relief and cash grants.
• HMRC is deferring VAT payments for the
next quarter.
For workers and families:
• The Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme means
employees can receive 80 per cent of their wages
up to a maximum of £2,500 per month.
• The Coronavirus Self Employment Income Support
Scheme will provide a grant to most self-employed
individuals or partnerships, worth 80% of their
profits up to a cap of £2,500 per month.
• Extra support for the unemployed and those on low
incomes through Universal Credit and Tax Credits,
worth up to £1,040.
• Nearly £1bn of additional support for renters.
8
• Mortgage holidays of three months for anyone in
difficulty due to coronavirus, including owners of
buy to let properties.
This is just some of the support available for
businesses and workers. Further information is
available online.
Going to work
You may travel for work purposes, but only where you
cannot work from home.
Employers and employees should discuss their
working arrangements, and employers should take
every possible step to facilitate their employees
working from home.
Certain jobs require people to travel to their place
of work.
If you cannot work from home then you can still
travel to work, provided neither you nor any of your
household have coronavirus symptoms. This is
consistent with advice from the Chief Medical Officer.
Further information on all these areas
and more is available online
If you live in England go to
gov.uk/coronavirus
If you live in Scotland go to
gov.scot/coronavirus-covid-19
If you live in Wales go to
gov.wales/coronavirus
If you live in Northern Ireland go to
nidirect.gov.uk/campaigns/coronavirus-covid-19
To receive this information in other languages or
alternative formats, please visit gov.uk/coronavirus
If you have difficulties communicating or hearing,
you can call 18001 111 on a textphone or access the
NHS 111 British Sign Language (BSL) interpreter
service through www.nhs.uk/111
Stay at home. Protect the NHS. Save lives.
9
