Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19 and exceeding permit limits for medical
use of radioactive substances: RPS C15
Published 30 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19 and exceeding permit limits for medical use of radioactive substances: RPS C15
You usually need to comply with the limits in your permit under regulation 13 and Schedule 23 of the Environmental
Contents
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
Conditions you must comply with
Enforcement
When to check back
Contact the Environment Agency
Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2016. These numerical limits restrict both the amount of radioactive:
material (including sealed sources) that you can keep and use
waste you can accumulate and dispose of, on or from your premises
If you comply with the conditions in this COVID-19 regulatory position statement (
RPS), you can temporarily exceed the
numerical limits in your permit for holding radioactive material (including sealed and unsealed sources). You can also
temporarily exceed the limits for managing radioactive waste.
You must tell the Environment Agency before you use this COVID-19RPS.
For unsealed sources you must send email confirmation that you are using this COVID-19RPS to:
RSR.Rotherham2.NE@environment-agency.gov.uk
For sealed sources contact us by telephone on 020 3023 8207 or 020 3023 8174. We will tell you how to submit the
information securely.
Your written confirmation must include the information specified in theConditions you must comply with section of this
COVID-19 RPS.
You will need written agreement from us if you are going to either:
make disposal to the sewer above the limits in your permit
hold additional sealed sources that would result in a change to the security category
If you generate additional radioactive waste by providing urgent medical care for a patient treated with radioactive
materials at another hospital, you may not be able to tell us in advance. You should notify us when you are able to.
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
This COVID-19 RPS only applies if you need to obtain additional radioactive material, or generate additional radioactive
waste, as a result of coronavirus (COVID-19). For example, this could be because coronavirus business disruption means
you need to:
carry out additional diagnostic tests or treatments, for example where you have a backlog of tests and treatments you
were unable to carry out
obtain additional material (sealed and unsealed radioactive sources) – including larger sources or alternative
radionuclides, because your regular supplies are interrupted, or because deliveries are restricted
provide medical care for a patient who has been treated with radioactive material at another hospital
This COVID-19 RPS only applies to:
radioactive materials (including sealed and unsealed sources) used for medical diagnosis and treatment in humans,
and radioactive waste from these activities
keeping and using radioactive material above the limits specified in your permit, including alternative radionuclides not
included in your permit
accumulating radioactive waste above the limits specified in your permit, including alternative radionuclides not
included in your permit
disposal by transfer or disposal to the sewer (with our written agreement), above the limits in your permit, including
alternative radionuclides not included in your permit
temporarily exceeding the numerical limits in your permit – this does not apply to any other regulatory requirements
This COVID-19 RPS only applies if you can demonstrate that you have taken all reasonable steps not to exceed the
numerical limits in your permit. Reasonable steps include:
contingency planning to avoid or minimise disruption to your business because of coronavirus
emergency response planning to minimise the impact and duration of not complying with your permit because of
coronavirus
This COVID-19 RPS does not apply to any other activity, even if it is under the same legislation. You may still need other
permits or licences for other activities you carry out.
Conditions you must comply with
You must:
keep records to show that you have complied with the conditions in this COVID-19RPS
explain in your written confirmation how you will manage any additional radioactive waste (including waste sealed
sources) you will generate
send us a radiological impact assessment from a Radioactive Waste Adviser if you will exceed the limits in your permit
for disposals to the sewer – this must show that the disposals will not cause a significant increase in dose to members
of the public
have written agreement from the Environment Agency before you make any disposals to the sewer that exceed the
limits in your permit
store any additional materials or wastes safely and securely to prevent loss, contamination or unauthorised access
For additional high activity sealed sources (
HASS), or similar sources, that exceed your current permit limits you must:
comply with the security requirements in your permit
store the sources at the building or location specified in schedule 1 in your permit that has the appropriate security level
Unless we agree otherwise, you must not:
hold additional sealed sources that would change your security category and increase the security level required
store HASS or similar sealed sources at a location on your premises not specified in your permit
You must comply with all the other requirements in your permit.
You must keep records that show why you needed to use this COVID-19RPS.
You must keep all records required by this COVID-19RPS for 2 years after this COVID-19RPS has expired, including any
extensions to it. You must make them available to the Environment Agency on request.
You must make sure your activities do not endanger human health or the environment.
Enforcement
A COVID-19 RPS means that the Environment Agency will not normally take enforcement action against you provided:
your activity meets the description set out in this COVID-19RPS
you comply with the conditions set out in this COVID-19RPS
your activity does not, and is not likely to, cause environmental pollution or harm human health
you have taken all reasonable steps to comply with your permit
If you operate under this COVID-19 RPS, but think you may no longer be able to comply with its conditions, you must tell
the Environment Agency immediately.
The Environment Agency will monitor how operators use and comply with this COVID-19RPS through its proportionate,
risk-based inspection and monitoring activity.
When to check back
This COVID-19 RPS will be withdrawn on 30 September 2020 unless we extend it. After this date you must comply with all
the conditions in your permit.
Contact the Environment Agency
Email: RSR.Rotherham2.NE@environment-agency.gov.uk
Telephone: 020 3023 8207 or 020 3023 8174
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
The UK has left the EU
Transition period: get ready for 2021
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
