Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: prisons and other prescribed places of
detention guidance
Updated 26 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: prisons and other prescribed places of detention guidance
Ministry
of Justice
Public Health
England
Contents
What you need to know
Background
Symptoms
What to do if someone develops symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) in a prison or PPD
Cohorting
Cleaning and waste
What you need to know
any prisoner or detainee with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature should be placed in protective isolation
for 7 days
if a member of staff becomes unwell on site with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature, they should go home
staff and prisoners should be reminded to wash their hands for 20 seconds more frequently and catch coughs and
sneezes in tissues
frequently clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are touched regularly, using your standard cleaning products
prisoners or detainees who have a new, continuous cough or a high temperature but are clinically well enough to
remain in prescribed places of detention (PPDs) do not need to be transferred to hospital
confirmed cases of coronavirus (COVID-19) should be notified by prison or immigration removal centre (IRC)
healthcare teams as soon as possible to local Public Health England (PHE) Health Protection Teams (HPT)
people who are severely unwell may be transferred to appropriate healthcare facilities with usual escorts and following
advice on safe transfers
staff should wear specified personal protective equipment (
PPE) for activities requiring sustained close contact with
possible cases (see below for detail)
if facing multiple cases of those displaying symptoms, ‘cohorting’, or the gathering of potentially infected cases into a
designated area, may be necessary
PPD leaders should be assessing their estate for suitable isolation and cohorting provision
Background
This guidance will assist healthcare staff and custodial and detention staff in addressing coronavirus (COVID-19) in
prescribed places of detention (PPDs).
The following establishments in England are included within the definition ofPPDs used in this guidance:
prisons (both public and privately managed)
immigration removal centres (IRC)
children and young people’s secure estate (CYPSE) young offender institutions (YOI), secure training centres (STC)
and secure children’s homes (SCH)
Controlling the spread of infection inPPDs will rely on coordinating healthcare and custodial staff working with localPHE
Health Protection Teams.
Recommendations made here may also be relevant to Prison Escort and Custodial Services (
PECS) staff, particularly
environmental cleaning recommendations and advice to staff.
This guidance may be updated in line with the changing situation.
Symptoms
The most common symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) are a new, continuous cough or a high temperature. For most
people, coronavirus (COVID-19) will be a mild infection.
What to do if someone develops symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) in a
prison or PPD
In PPD settings, suspected cases are likely to be identified by:
custodial and detention staff
other prisoners and detainees
self-referral
at reception screening or through other means
Advice on the use of PPE for healthcare staff and custodial staff with patient-facing roles
Custodial or healthcare staff in close contact with confirmed or suspected cases
Healthcare staff in close contact with confirmed or suspected cases where aerosol generated procedure is being undertaken
Limiting spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) in PPDs
All staff should be alert to prisoners or detainees who have a new, continuous cough or high temperature and the prisoner
or detainee should be isolated in single occupancy accommodation (for example cell or detention room).
If such accommodation is not available, possible cases should be held alone in higher occupancy accommodation. The
prisoner or detainee should wear a surgical face mask while being transferred to an isolation room. Escorting staff do not
require PPE but must clean their hands on leaving the prisoner or detainee.
Prisoners or detainees who have a new, continuous cough or a high temperature, but who are clinically well enough to
remain in prison, do not need to be transferred to hospital. Regular observations are not required unless indicated for
other clinical reasons. Where possible, any assessment should be done without entering the room.
Access to a language-line, or similar translation service, must be provided as soon as a possible case enters the
establishment. This will ensure an accurate history can be taken.
If a member of staff has helped someone who was taken unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature, they
do not need to go home unless they develop symptoms themselves. They should wash their hands thoroughly for 20
seconds after any contact with someone who is unwell.
If a member of staff becomes unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature they should be sent home
immediately and advised to follow the stay at home guidance.
All PPDs should have a plan in place identifying an appropriate place to isolate patients with symptoms, preferably with
input from an infection control specialist.
HPTs will contact PHE’s National Health and Justice Team and Centre Health and Justice leads in response to cases in
prisons and PPDs. The HPT and the National Health and Justice Team will decide whether to declare a formal incident
and respond accordingly. This will support efforts across organisations to achieve infection prevention and control
following the national contingency plan for outbreaks inPPD.
As infection can be spread through both personal contact and environmental contamination, it is important to consider
reviewing current infection prevention and control practices to ensure they follow national infection prevention and control
guidance for PPDs.
Cohorting
Should the numbers of cases in an establishment increase, isolation resources could be under pressure. Cohorting is a
strategy which can be effective in the care of large numbers of people who are ill by gathering all those who are suspected
confirmed cases into one area (or a limited number of areas where it is necessary to keep some prisoners or detainees
separate).
Cohorting presents many advantages in infection control. However, the area used for cohorting should not be considered
the only source of infection. This is because PPDs are at risk of new cases being imported from the community or other
establishments. Governors, Directors and IRC Managers must survey their establishments for suitability for cohorting and
conduct risk assessments on the co-location of prisoners who would normally be kept separated.
Cleaning and waste
Guidance on cleaning and waste disposal is available.
Advice on the use of PPE for healthcare staff and custodial staff with
patient-facing roles
Healthcare staff are most likely to work directly with patients with symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19). Custodial staff,
PECS and transport services may also be engaged especially when symptoms are first presented.
Those who are severely unwell will be transferred to an appropriate NHS facility. The facility that receives the individual
must be informed that the patient may have an acute respiratory disease that will require precautionary isolation.
Infection prevention and control advice includes wearing the appropriate level of Personal Protective Equipment (
PPE).
Custodial or healthcare staff in close contact with confirmed or suspected
cases:
Staff should minimise any non-essential contact with suspected coronavirus (COVID-19) cases. For activities requiring
close contact with a possible case, for example, interviewing people at less than 2 metres distance, or arrest and restrain,
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
PHE advises that the minimum level ofPPE that custodial and escort staff should wear is:
disposable gloves
fluid repellent surgical face mask
if available, a disposable plastic apron and disposable eye protection (such as face visor or goggles) should also be
worn
Healthcare staff in close contact with confirmed or suspected cases where
aerosol generated procedure is being undertaken
PHE advises that the minimum level ofPPE for healthcare staff required where aerosol generated procedure is being
undertaken is:
FFP3 respirator
gloves with long tight-fitting cuffs
disposable fluid-resistant, full-sleeve gowns (single-use)
disposable eye protection, preferably face visor
For all staff, PPE must be changed regularly, either every 2 to 4 hours or in between patients.
PPE should be removed in a specific order that minimises the potential for cross-contamination. The order of removal of
PPE should be:
1. Peel off gloves and dispose of in clinical waste
2. Perform hand hygiene, by handwashing with soap and water, or using alcohol gel
3. Remove apron by folding in on itself and place in a clinical waste bin
4. Remove goggles or visor only by the headband or sides and dispose of in clinical waste
5. Remove fluid repellent surgical face mask from behind and dispose in clinical waste
6. Perform hand hygiene
All used PPE must be disposed of as Clinical Waste. Scrupulous hand hygiene is essential to reduce cross-contamination.
Coronaviruses can be killed by alcohol hand gel and most disinfectants.
Information on donning and doffing of PPE is available.
Limiting spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) in PPDs
Managers of PPDs can help reduce the spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) by reminding everyone of the public health
advice.
Staff and prisoners or detainees should be reminded to wash their hands for 20 seconds more frequently than normal.
Frequently clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are touched regularly, using your standard cleaning products.
Bleach-based disinfectant products (such as Titan-Chlor tablets) are recommended in PPDs for disinfection.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
