KCDC Issues Japanese Encephalitis Alert Notice

[Apr. 3 (Tues.), 2018]

Person in charge: Lee Chae-Jin (Infectious

Disease Surveillance,

043-719-7161, cjl307@korea.kr)

□ The Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Director Jeong Eun-Kyeong)
issued a Japanese Encephalitis (JE) alert notice to the whole country after confirming
Culex tritaeniorhynchus, the JE mediated mosquito, in Busan on 1st April 2018.
(about JE :

http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs386/en)
*

*

Culex
tritaeniorhynchus is a small,
dark brown mosquito with no
distinctive
patterns on its body
and a wide white band at the
center of its mouth.
Not all Culex tritaeniorhynchus have
the JE virus.

Culex tritaeniorhynchus
□ KCDC conducts ongoing JE vector surveillance to issue an alert notice upon
confirming the first JE vector mosquito.
⃝ KCDC issues a JE warning whenever the first JE patient is confirmed, the density of
JE-mediating mosquitoes is high, or the JE virus is isolated from collected mosquitoes.
⃝ As a result of Japanese encephalitis monitoring over the past 10 years, the
number of patients with Japanese encephalitis has not increased. However,
considering that about 90% of reported patients are over 40 years old, particular
attention should be paid to mosquito bites in this age group.
□ There is an effective vaccine for JE, and children should be vaccinated against
the disease from as early as 12 months to 12 years of age, in accordance with
the national immunization program following the standard schedule.
⃝ Vaccination is recommended for those who are immunocompromised or those
who are at high risk of infection due to exposure to mosquitoes.
□ KCDC data shows that JE vector mosquitoes have been confirmed earlier each
year since 2015 due to the intensive monitoring of vectors. With rising spring
temperatures, mosquitoes have become more active each year as well.
⃝ KCDC recommended the public to comply with the mosquito avoidance and
control instructions during indoor and outdoor activities.

