Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Transmission characteristics and principles of
infection prevention and control
Updated 4 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: infection prevention and control (IPC)
Public Health
England
1. Routes of transmission
Infection control advice is based on the reasonable assumption that the transmission characteristics of COVID-19 are
similar to those of the 2003 SARS-CoV outbreak. The initial phylogenetic and immunologic similarities between COVID-19
and SARS-CoV can be extrapolated to gain insight into some of the epidemiological characteristics.
The transmission of COVID-19 is thought to occur mainly through respiratory droplets generated by coughing and
Contents
1. Routes of transmission
2. Incubation and infectious period
3. Survival in the environment
sneezing, and through contact with contaminated surfaces. The predominant modes of transmission are assumed to be
droplet and contact.
During AGPs there is an increased risk of aerosol spread of infectious agents irrespective of the mode of transmission
(contact, droplet, or airborne), and airborne precautions must be implemented when performing aerosol generating
procedure (AGPs), including those carried out on a suspected or confirmed case of COVID-19.
Initial research has identified the presence of COVID-19 virus in the stools and conjunctival secretions of confirmed cases.
All secretions (except sweat) and excretions, including diarrhoeal stools from patients with known or possible COVID-19,
should be regarded as potentially infectious.
2. Incubation and infectious period
The incubation period is from 1 to 14 days (median 5 days). Assessment of the clinical and epidemiological characteristics
of COVID-19 cases suggests that, similar to SARS, most patients will not be infectious until the onset of symptoms. In
most cases, individuals are usually considered infectious while they have symptoms; how infectious individuals are,
depends on the severity of their symptoms and stage of their illness.
The median time from symptom onset to clinical recovery for mild cases is approximately 2 weeks and is 3 to 6 weeks for
severe or critical cases. There have been case reports that suggest possible infectivity prior to the onset of symptoms,
with detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in some individuals before the onset of symptoms.
Further study is required to determine the frequency, importance and impact of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic
infection, in terms of transmission risks.
From international data, the balance of evidence is that most people will have sufficiently reduced infectivity 7 days after
the onset of symptoms.
3. Survival in the environment
In light of limited data for SARS-CoV-2, evidence was assessed from studies conducted with previous human
coronaviruses including MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV. Human coronaviruses can survive on inanimate objects and can
remain viable for up to 5 days at temperatures of 22 to 25°C and relative humidity of 40 to 50% (which is typical of air-
conditioned indoor environments).
Survival on environmental surfaces is also dependent on the surface type. An experimental study using a SARS-CoV-2
strain reported viability on plastic for up to 72 hours, for 48 hours on stainless steel and up to 8 hours on copper. Viability
was quantified by end-point titration on Vero E6 cells. Extensive environmental contamination may occur following an
AGP.
The rate of clearance of aerosols in an enclosed space is dependent on the extent of any mechanical or natural ventilation
– the greater the number of air changes per hour (ventilation rate), the sooner any aerosol will be cleared.
The time required for clearance of aerosols, and thus the time after which the room can be entered without a filtering face
piece (class 3) (FFP3) respirator, can be determined by the number of air changes per hour (
ACH) as outlined inWHO
guidance; in general wards and single rooms there should be a minimum of 6 air changes per hour, in negative-pressure
isolation rooms there should be a minimum of 12 air changes per hour.
Where feasible, environmental decontamination should be performed when it is considered appropriate to enter the room
or area without an FFP3 respirator. A single air change is estimated to remove 63% of airborne contaminants, after 5 air
changes less than 1% of airborne contamination is thought to remain. A minimum of 20 minutes, that is 2 air changes, in
hospital settings where the majority of these procedures occur is considered pragmatic.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
