HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 3rd
of April 2020, 103 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 1,978.
• Of the newly reported cases, 15 cases were identified in people
entering the country, highlighting the need for strict compliance
with quarantine requirements. The Thai Government has
announced that between now and 15 April, Thailand will take
steps to reduce the number of people entering the country.
• A total of 39 of the new cases are close contacts of previously
confirmed cases, highlighting the need for strict adherence with
social distancing in all settings. Cases are also still being
reported in individuals whose work brings them into contact with
large numbers of people, suggesting that further social
distancing restrictions may be required.
• 62 of 76 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed
cases of COVID-19. Approximately half of the cases to date
have occurred in Bangkok and half have been detected in other
provinces.
UPDATES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN
THAILAND
• The government has announced a nationwide curfew
beginning today April 3rd
. All residents are instructed to remain
inside their homes between the hours of 10pm and 4am.
• The government requests that everyone wear a cloth mask
when outside their home. To date, 43 million cloth masks have
already been distributed.
• The government is preparing to use some hotels as field
hospitals. A total of 16,000 rooms from contracted hotels will be
used for the isolation and care of mildly ill patients. Persons with
adequate facilities in their homes (e.g. private room, separate
bathroom) may be permitted to stay in self-quarantine. The contracted hotels will be inspected according to
criteria set by the MOPH.
• Measures are being taken to ensure the availability of drugs, medical supplies and equipment.
• The Ministry of Public Health has allocated 1.5 million surgical masks for health facilities, including those
not under the Ministry. Distribution will be enough to maintain 1 month of stocks.
• The current stock of N95 masks for healthcare workers held by the Ministry of Public Health is not enough
to meet the estimated national demand of 60,000 masks per day. Procurement is a challenge due to very
high global demand. Urgent research is being undertaken on the effectiveness of UVC irradiation for N95
disinfection and reuse.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 3 April 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
total and new cases reported
in the last 24 hours
1,978 confirmed (103 new)
19 deaths (3 new)
1,378 people hospitalized
32 Healthcare staff (5 new)
23 severe cases
19 deaths (4 new)
581 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 3 April 2020
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
• Face masks are a common sight on the streets of Thailand, but is is
vital that they are used properly.
• Masks are not a substitute for proper handwashing with soap and
water or with alcohol rub.
• Please do not wear N95 respirators as supplies are currently low and
these are specialised masks that are needed for healthcare workers.
• In this video Dr Daniel Kertesz of WHO Thailand explains how to wear
a face mask safely, and how to dispose of it properly.
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for essential activities (e.g. medical care, purchase food).
• Always try to maintain a distance of at least 1.5 meters from all other persons.
• Wash your hands frequently. An alcohol-based hand rub is also effective
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
• Wear a mask when outside your home. Do not use N95 respirators as supplies are limited and they are
critically needed for healthcare workers.
• Cough or sneeze into your elbow or a clean tissue. Dispose of tissues immediately and wash your hands.
• Do not shake hands, embrace, share eating utensils or smoking devices with other people.
• Keep all commonly touched surfaces clean. Advice on cleaning practices and the survivability of the SARS-
CoV-2 virus on surfaces & in different settings is available here.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides information and advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit
