Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: cleaning in non-healthcare settings
Updated 26 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: cleaning of non-healthcare settings
Public Health
England
What you need to know
cleaning an area with normal household disinfectant after someone with suspected coronavirus (
COVID-19) has left will
reduce the risk of passing the infection on to other people
wherever possible, wear disposable or washing-up gloves and aprons for cleaning. These should be double-bagged,
then stored securely for 72 hours then thrown away in the regular rubbish after cleaning is finished
using a disposable cloth, first clean hard surfaces with warm soapy water. Then disinfect these surfaces with the
cleaning products you normally use. Pay particular attention to frequently touched areas and surfaces, such as
Contents
What you need to know
Background
Principles of cleaning after the case has left the setting or area
bathrooms, grab-rails in corridors and stairwells and door handles
if an area has been heavily contaminated, such as with visible bodily fluids, from a person with coronavirus (
COVID-19),
consider using protection for the eyes, mouth and nose, as well as wearing gloves and an apron
wash hands regularly with soap and water for 20 seconds, and after removing gloves, aprons and other protection used
while cleaning
Background
Experience of new coronaviruses (SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV) has been used to inform this guidance. The risk of
infection depends on many factors, including:
the type of surfaces contaminated
the amount of virus shed from the individual
the time the individual spent in the setting
the time since the individual was last in the setting
The infection risk from coronavirus (COVID-19) following contamination of the environment decreases over time. It is not
yet clear at what point there is no risk. However, studies of other viruses in the same family suggest that, in most
circumstances, the risk is likely to be reduced significantly after 72 hours.
Principles of cleaning after the case has left the setting or area
Personal protective equipment (PPE)
The minimum PPE to be worn for cleaning an area where a person with possible or confirmed coronavirus (
COVID-19) is
disposable gloves and an apron. Hands should be washed with soap and water for 20 seconds after all PPE has been
removed.
If a risk assessment of the setting indicates that a higher level of virus may be present (for example, where unwell
individuals have slept such as a hotel room or boarding school dormitory) or there is visible contamination with body fluids,
then the need for additional PPE to protect the cleaner’s eyes, mouth and nose might be necessary. The local Public
Health England (PHE) Health Protection Team (HPT) can advise on this.
Cleaning and disinfection
Public areas where a symptomatic individual has passed through and spent minimal time, such as corridors, but which are
not visibly contaminated with body fluids can be cleaned thoroughly as normal.
All surfaces that the symptomatic person has come into contact with must be cleaned and disinfected, including:
objects which are visibly contaminated with body fluids
all potentially contaminated high-contact areas such as bathrooms, door handles, telephones, grab-rails in corridors and
stairwells
Use disposable cloths or paper roll and disposable mop heads, to clean all hard surfaces, floors, chairs, door handles and
sanitary fittings, following one of the options below:
use either a combined detergent disinfectant solution at a dilution of 1,000 parts per million available chlorine
or
a household detergent followed by disinfection (1000 ppm av.cl.). Follow manufacturer’s instructions for dilution,
application and contact times for all detergents and disinfectants
or
if an alternative disinfectant is used within the organisation, this should be checked and ensure that it is effective against
enveloped viruses
Avoid creating splashes and spray when cleaning.
Any cloths and mop heads used must be disposed of and should be put into waste bags as outlined below.
When items cannot be cleaned using detergents or laundered, for example, upholstered furniture and mattresses, steam
cleaning should be used.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Any items that are heavily contaminated with body fluids and cannot be cleaned by washing should be disposed of.
Laundry
Wash items in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Use the warmest water setting and dry items completely.
Dirty laundry that has been in contact with an unwell person can be washed with other people’s items.
Do not shake dirty laundry, this minimises the possibility of dispersing virus through the air.
Clean and disinfect anything used for transporting laundry with your usual products, in line with the cleaning guidance
above.
Waste
Waste from possible cases and cleaning of areas where possible cases have been (including disposable cloths and
tissues):
1. Should be put in a plastic rubbish bag and tied when full.
2. The plastic bag should then be placed in a second bin bag and tied.
3. It should be put in a suitable and secure place and marked for storage until the individual’s test results are known.
Waste should be stored safely and kept away from children. You should not put your waste in communal waste areas until
negative test results are known or the waste has been stored for at least 72 hours.
if the individual tests negative, this can be put in with the normal waste
if the individual tests positive, then store it for at least 72 hours and put in with the normal waste
If storage for at least 72 hours is not appropriate, arrange for collection as a Category B infectious waste either by your
local waste collection authority if they currently collect your waste or otherwise by a specialist clinical waste contractor.
They will supply you with orange clinical waste bags for you to place your bags into so the waste can be sent for
appropriate treatment.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
