HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 9th of April 2020, 54 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,423.
• Of the newly reported cases, 5 cases were identified in people
returning from outside Thailand.
• To reduce transmission from imported cases, all persons
returning from other countries will be quarantined in state-
arranged venues.
 An additional 4 healthcare workers are included in the newly
reported cases, bringing the total number of healthcare workers
infected with COVID-19 to 80, which is 3.4% of all cases. These cases include 36 nurses and 16 doctors,
with the rest working in allied healthcare professions .
• To protect healthcare workers and the healthcare system, it is essential that everyone complies with
measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
• A total of 22 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed cases. Twelve new cases are
reported in individuals whose work brings them into contact with large numbers of people.
• 67 of 77 provinces have reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19.
UPDATE ON MEASURES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND:
• The Department of Health Services supports 1.04 million community health volunteers (CHVs) nationwide.
CHVs have been enlisted to help educate, communicate and enforce social distancing measures.
To date, around 9 million households have been visited to deliver these important messages.
• More than 14,000 Thai citizens living abroad have registered with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
requesting to return home. The Government will limit the repatriation to approximately 200 persons/day to
ensure that all returnees are quarantined at government approved facilities.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,423 confirmed (54 new)
32 deaths (2 new)
1,451 people hospitalized
80 healthcare staff infected (4 new)
36 severe cases
940 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 9 April 2020
KEY MESSAGES FROM THE NEW WHO GUIDANCE ON FACE MASKS IN THE COMMUNITY:
• It is critical that medical masks and respirators be prioritized for health care workers.
• The use of nonmedical masks made of other materials (e.g., cotton fabric) in the community setting
has not been well evaluated. There is no current evidence to make a recommendation for or against
their use in this setting.
• WHO is collaborating with research and development partners to better understand the effectiveness
of nonmedical masks. WHO strongly encourages countries that issue recommendations for the use of
masks for healthy people in the community to conduct research on this critical topic. WHO will update
its guidance when new evidence becomes available.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides information / advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
To protect healthcare workers and the healthcare
system, it is essential that everyone complies with
measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
• Masks are not a substitute for proper handwashing with
soap and water or with alcohol rub.
• Please do not wear N95 respirators- these are specialised
masks that are needed for healthcare workers.
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for
essential activities (e.g. medical care, purchase food).
• Always try to maintain a distance of at least 1 metre from
all other persons
• Wash your hands frequently with soap and water. An
alcohol-based hand rub is also effective
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
