1
Basic Policies for Novel Coronavirus Disease Control
February 25, 2020
1. Current situation and purpose of the Basic Policies
- Patients with no apparent routes of transmission are reported sporadically in
several regions of Japan.
- However, at this time, there are no regions where a large-scale spread of the
infection has been identified.
- In order to end this epidemic as soon as possible, it is extremely important to
prevent one cluster from developing another cluster, and the comprehensive
measures must be taken.
- It is also significantly important to take comprehensive measures and curtail
the rate of increase in patients as much as possible.
- To prepare for the possible increase of patients in Japan, this is the timing to
strengthen the health system to deliver necessary medical care especially for
the severe patients.
- This is an extremely crucial time for minimizing future negative impact on
health in Japan.
2. Current knowledge of the novel coronavirus infection (omit)
3. Objectives of countermeasures at this moment
- End the epidemic at the early stages while suppressing the rate of increase in
patients and minimizing the scale of the epidemic.
- Minimize the incidence of severe cases.
- Minimize the impact on society and economy of Japan.
4. Summary of the Basic Policies for Novel Coronavirus Control
(1) Information sharing with individuals, private sectors, and regions
a) Provide accurate and clear information and encourage calm response.
b) Encourage employees and other personnel to take days off if they have
fever or other flu-like symptoms, and promote teleworking and staggered
office hours.
c) Call for reconsidering necessity to organize events.
d) Provide appropriate information and support for Japanese nationals in
countries where infection is spreading.
e) Provide appropriate and prompt information to the public, foreign
governments and foreign tourists.
2
(2) Understanding the situation of infection in Japan
Shift the focus of PCR test to the confirmation of diagnosis for pneumonia
patients who require hospitalization, while strengthening the surveillance
system to grasp the epidemic situation in Japan.
(3) Measures to control the infection
a) Call for cooperation of the general public in communities with increased
patients to voluntarily refrain from going out.
b) Call for school managers, through local governments, to take appropriate
measures, including temporary closure of schools.
(4) Health system to deliver medical care
a) Accept suspected patients of the novel coronavirus at general medical
institutions in communities after fully considering the infection control
measures, whereas patients with mild flu-like symptoms stay at home. Prepare
appropriate medical care at the early stage for the elderly and those with
underlying diseases.
b) Establish a health system to provide appropriate hospitalized medical care.
c) Strengthen infection control measures.
(5) Border control measures
Maintain current entry restrictions and the recommendation for travel
suspension to prevent a sudden influx of infected persons into Japan.
(6) Others
a) Request to ramp up production and ensure smooth supply of masks,
disinfectants, etc.
b) Maintain close international cooperation and gather information. Actively
share the knowledge obtained in Japan with the WHO and related institutions.
c) Pay due consideration to human rights of patients and those involved in the
infection control activities.
5. Way forward
Based on these Basic Policies, ministries and agencies will collaborate with
each other and announce concrete measures.
If the developing situation or new scientific knowledge necessitates the
revisions to the Policies, they will be updated and substantiated each time,
taking into account discussions of experts.
