 

ye ula

AJAY BHALLA, IAS Home Secretary

 

Goverment ot ns
ort Bock,

eas ah

 

DO No. h32026-DM ILA) Date : 294 Mare, 2020

De:

 

Secwfonsy

Kindly vofer to my DO letter of even nu 24! Murch 2020 where’n an Order dated
24.805.2020 under Section ॥॥(2)6) of the Disasler Management Act, 205 alougwich
lockdown measures lu be taen by Minisirics and Deparments of Government of Inna, and
Slate Governmers*Lhiion Territories, te contain the spread of COVID-I9 in the eouniry
' issued. This was rolluwed by two Adkiendum Orders datee 28.03.2020 wud 27.02.2920

 

 

 

to che guielines on lockslown measure,

2. The consolidated guidclines, by incorgorating changes nude through che ha
Addeadums, on the lockdown measure to ue Osler dated 24.00,2020 is available at
bnps::imha.gov in‘sitesdefmmlt tiles BR ConsolidarecGjuidelinewofMJHA, 280%

 

   

3... Twoald further like to clarity thae

a, With dhe issue of I° adkdandun, transportation of all goods, wichout d stinction of
enlial and mex

   

ential, have been al.cwes.
b. “Pension” under exem

 

ions to clause 2(g), inelude persiow and provident tana
servizes provided by Unployces Provident lune Organisation (EPVO),

eServices pr Indian Red Crass Society uty ak

4, Groceries include hygiene products suet

 

included! under claus

 

 

28 ham washes, soaps, disiulectants,
buy waa, shampoos, suriuce cleaners, deter geuls sul lissue papers, coal paste
oval care, sanivary pus and diapers, butwery cells, chargers et.

ss. Lutire supply chain of milk colleedion and distrihucion, including its packaging,
twaleral i allowed,

£ News paper delivery supply chi is alo allowed wxker print medi.

4. rule also like to inforin dwt the Central Government has also allowed use of
SDRE for homeless people. including migrant labourers, stranded due to lockdown
messures, and sheltered in the reel camps and otlisr places for providing them food ete...
Jor the containment of spread of Cawid-I9 virus in the country

 

ComdsP-2
>. MILA has issued another Onder today under the DM et 2095, for issuing directions
Fe dis.rict authorities, Zor strict implerte-iation ef addition] measures ro डा the mawerment
of migramts and providing them wich quatentine fhe lilies, shelters, fond ete., and ensuring
aymen: of wages cad nom-evietion by their landlords, Is sIrict imtplemeuration nocd to he
ensures

6 _Distriet authorities and field agencies may please be informed acvordingly so as ¢0
aveid eny ambiguicy atthe ground level.

wath Kind rogares,

SS sinvere'y

  

 

(Ajay Kumar hdl
To
Secretaries in Gol
