Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for consumers on coronavirus (COVID-19)
and food
Published 17 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Guidance for consumers on coronavirus (COVID-19) and food
Food Standards Agency
1. What you need to know about coronavirus and food
It is very unlikely that you can catch coronavirus (COVID-19) from food.
Contents
1. What you need to know about coronavirus and food
2. Food hygiene when shopping
3. Social distancing when shopping
4. Food hygiene at home
5. Food storage and reuse at home
6. Takeaway food
Cooking thoroughly will kill the virus.
COVID-19 is a respiratory illness. It is not known to be transmitted by exposure to food or food packaging.
Everyone should wash their hands regularly with soap and water, for at least 20 seconds, to reduce the risk of illness.
It is especially important to wash hands before handling food or eating.
2. Food hygiene when shopping
The risk of coronavirus (COVID-19) cross-contamination to food and food packaging is very low. Food businesses must
ensure that they have the correct food hygiene and food safety processes in placeand that these are being followed to
protect their customers.
Staff handling food in shops are required to maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness and wear suitable, clean
clothing. This includes regular hand washing to maintain good hygiene.
Food businesses are required to have asystem for managing food safety in place, but this does not necessarily require
staff to wear gloves when serving or handling food.
When you are buying loose foods such as fruit, vegetables, or bread in a bakery, try and only touch what you are going to
buy.
2.1 Imported food products
The risk of imported food and packaging from affected countries being contaminated with coronavirus is very unlikely. This
is because the law requires the exporter to follow the right controls during the packing and shipping process to ensure
good hygiene is met.
2.2 Reusable cups
Customers may previously have used reusable cups or containers when shopping or buying drinks at cafes and other
retailers. It is up to the individual business to decide whether they allow the use of reusable cups or containers during this
period.
If reusable cups or containers are used, they should be washed thoroughly in hot, soapy water, or in a dishwasher, if
suitable.
3. Social distancing when shopping
You should maintain a 2 metre distance between yourself and others, and only buy what you need. This is to avoid
crowding and to create adequate spacing between other shoppers and staff.
Shops and supermarkets may take their ownaction to avoid crowding. This can include monitoring the number of
customers within the store and limiting access to avoid congestion. They may also implement queue management
systems to limit crowds gathering at entrances and to maintain the 2 metre distance.
Further information on social distancing can be found on GOV.UK.
4. Food hygiene at home
Although it is very unlikely that coronavirus is transmitted through food, cooking thoroughly will kill the virus.
If you have symptoms associated with coronavirus, or have tested positive for COVID-19, you can minimise direct hand
contact with food by using tongs and utensils.
It is important that anyone handling and preparing food for others follows the Food Standard Agency’sguidance on food
safety and hygiene.
You should always use a food-safe disinfectant when cleaning surfaces and follow the instructions on the pack. If there is
a shortage of suitable cleaning products, you can use hot, soapy water to clean these surfaces.
4.1 Food packaging
If you have been shopping, there should be no need to sanitise the outer packaging of food. This is because food
businesses are required to have a system for managing food safety in place, which should include keeping packaging
clean. You should still follow good hygiene practice by washing your hands after handling any outer packaging. If you have
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
reason to believe the packaging has been contaminated, you should follow the recommended cleaning guidance.
4.2 Loose food
It is very unlikely that you can catch coronavirus from food. You should follow good hygiene and preparation practices
when handling and eating raw fruit, leafy salads and vegetables. This includes washing fresh produce to help to remove
any contamination on the surface. Peeling the outer layers or skins of certain fruits and vegetables can also help to
remove surface contamination. We would remind you not to wash raw chicken or other meat as this can lead to cross-
contamination in your kitchen.
It is important to wash your hands with soap and water, for at least 20 seconds before and after you prepare food.
5. Food storage and reuse at home
‘Best before’ and ‘use-by’ dates should be used to make sure your food is safe and that you avoid food waste by not
throwing away edible food unnecessarily. You should always follow the manufacturer’s instruction on the packaging.
‘Best before’ is about quality: food is still safe to be eaten after this date but may no longer be at its best.
‘Use-by’ is about safety: food should not be eaten, cooked or frozen after this date, as it could be unsafe – even if it has
been stored correctly and looks and smells fine.
If your food is safe to freeze, it can be frozen right up to and including the ‘use-by’ date. Freezing acts as a ‘pause button’
and stops bacterial growth. You can freeze most food items, including raw and cooked meats, fruit and eggs.
When food defrosts, its core temperature rises. This provides the ideal conditions for bacteria to grow if left at room
temperature. It is best to defrost food slowly and safely in the fridge. Food should be eaten within 24 hours once defrosted.
6. Takeaway food
Orders should not be made in person on the premises. You should order online or by telephone in advance.
If you are collecting your food in person from a takeaway or restaurant which offers a pick-up service, you should adhere
to the social distancing rules set out by the food business
. This may include having staggered collection times and using a
queue management system to maintain the 2 metre separation.
It is safe to have takeaway food delivered if the business you order from follows the Government’s safety guidance.
Staff preparing your food should regularly wash their hands and maintain good hygiene practices in food preparation and
handling areas.
Government advice on social distancing applies to those delivering food. You should minimise the chance of coronavirus
spreading by maintaining a distance of 2 metres when the food is delivered.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
