Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: safe handling and processing for
samples in laboratories
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for sampling and for diagnostic laboratories
Public Health
England
Contents
1. Latest updates to this page
2. Scope
3. Background
4. Risk assessment
5. Personal protective equipment
6. A risk-based approach to sample processing
7. Centrifugation
8. Movement of samples within the laboratory
1. Latest updates to this page
3 April: Detail on near-patient testing in Section 4
2. Scope
Knowledge about the pathogenic potential and transmission risks for the novel coronavirus, SARS coronavirus-2
1 (SARS-
CoV-2), and the associated disease it causes,COVID-192, is currently very limited. This interim guidance is based on
current knowledge of the virus and other coronaviruses. It aims to minimise risks for laboratory staff handling specimens
from patients with possible or laboratory-confirmed COVID-19.
This interim guidance is specific to clinical diagnostic laboratory practice in England and may differ from guidance
produced by agencies in other countries, including recommendations about containment levels and control measures.
Advice offered here relates to laboratory procedures conducted in clinical diagnostic laboratories. It does not cover virus
isolation, propagation, research work, or work involving animals infected with SARS-CoV-2.
This PHE guidance has been produced in collaboration with the Health and Safety Executive and will be updated when
new information becomes available.
3. Background
The Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens (
ACDP) met in early 2020 to discuss the proposed Hazard Group (HG)
for SARS-CoV-2. Whilst this is a novel coronavirus it is anticipated that the existing safe systems of work for similarHG3
coronaviruses can be used to effectively manage the risks of SARS-CoV-2. Based on the current information, theACDP
committee agreed on a provisional classification of SARS-CoV-2 as a HG3 pathogen.
For the related Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (
MERS-CoV), tissue tropism appears to be broad in humans
and although MERS-CoV is zoonotic, human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV has occurred in households and
healthcare facilities through close contact with infected individuals. There is a human-to-human transmission risk (and an
assumed potential zoonotic source) for SARS-CoV-2 infection (COVID-19).
MERS-CoV RNA has been detected in a variety of human specimens, including urine, faeces and blood, and it is
reasonable to assume this could be the case for SARS-CoV-2 until more is known about the virus. Human tissue
specimens may also pose an infection risk, based on information obtained from studies of infected animals.
Laboratory-acquired infections with the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (
SARS-CoV) have been reported
previously but only in laboratories performing virus propagation. To date, laboratory-acquired infection has not been
reported for SARS-CoV-2.
Based on knowledge of other coronaviruses, infection withSARS-CoV-2 could occur by inhalation of aerosolised virus or
by contact with droplets and contaminated fomites. Exposure to upper and lower respiratory tract specimens in the
absence of appropriate containment and control measures is likely to represent the greatest risk of SARS-CoV-2
laboratory acquired infection.
It is possible that laboratory workers could become infected if appropriate precautions are not taken when handling
biological samples from patients with COVID-19. Since a patient with suspectedCOVID-19 may present to any healthcare
facility, it is important that all clinical diagnostic laboratories take appropriate measures to contain potentially infectious
materials and prevent secondary infections and onward transmission.
4. Risk assessment
Clinical staff should notify laboratory staff when specimens are submitted from a patient with suspected or confirmed
COVID-19, through proper completion of request forms or electronic test ordering systems, and by direct communication
with the laboratory.
It is possible that clinicians may not have consideredCOVID-19 as a potential diagnosis prior to sending specimens to the
laboratory. Good laboratory practice, including the use of standard biological safety precautions, regular training of staff,
and the use of standard operating procedures, will help minimise potential risks.
Clinical laboratories must perform their own risk assessments for handling biological specimens from patients with
9. Packaging and transport of samples
10. Cleaning and handling of waste
11. Emergency procedures
12. Maintaining service delivery
suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
Near-patient testing (also known as point-of-care tests) for suspected and confirmedCOVID-19 cases, including blood gas
analysis, must be avoided unless a local risk assessment has been completed and shows that it can be undertaken safely.
Near-patient tests for viral nucleic acid amplification vary widely in their general safety and where aerosols or droplets may
be generated. If a local risk assessment can show that any aerosol or droplet generation occurs within a closed analyser,
and external surfaces can be cleaned with detergent-based disinfectant, then these tests may be used.
A suitable and sufficient assessment of the risks when handling samples potentially containingSARS-CoV-2 must be
undertaken prior to the work starting. Samples for confirmation of known or presumptive positives must be processed at
full containment level (CL3). See section 5 for additional guidance on aspects of sample processing that may not need full
CL3 containment.
5. Personal protective equipment
Laboratory staff must wear personal protective equipment (
PPE) when conducting work in the laboratory.PPE must be
removed on leaving the laboratory and hygiene practices including hand washing must be rigorously maintained.
PPE must include disposable gloves and a laboratory coat or gown as a minimum, and may also include eye protection
and other equipment, as identified by risk assessment. Respiratory protective equipment such as masks or respirators are
not necessary when respiratory tract, urine, faecal or tissue samples are handled inside a microbiological safety cabinet
(MSC).
Masks or respirators are not an appropriate substitute for processing samples in anMSC when there is a risk of aerosols
being generated.
6. A risk-based approach to sample processing
Under normal circumstances, any procedure with HG3 pathogens involving potentially infectious material where there is a
risk of generating aerosols, droplets or splashes, must be performed within a MSC at CL3 as defined in theApproved
Code of Practice and Guidance for the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) Regulations 2002 (as
amended).
However, in light of the exceptional circumstances posed bySARS-CoV-2 and the potential impact on the diagnostic
sector, a risk-based proportionate approach has been adopted in agreement with ACDP and HSE where certain laboratory
activities can be undertaken within a MSC at containment level 2 (CL2). These are described in5.2 below.
6.1 Work that may be conducted at CL2
Routine laboratory blood tests can be carried out in auto-analysers using standard practices and procedures at
CL2, but
only after a suitable and sufficient risk assessment has been conducted which considers the potential for the generation of
infectious aerosols. Auto-analysers should be disinfected following local procedures after sample processing and before
scheduled maintenance in accordance with manufacturers recommendations.
Some auto-analyser protocols for routine laboratory tests may require specimen tubes to be opened first, or initial
processing of the sample to be performed. Evidence suggests that capping and uncapping of samples is not a high-risk
aerosol generating procedure which is dependent on the cap and tube design. These factors must be considered in a
suitable and sufficient risk assessment which also considers if the sample needs to be centrifuged, vortexed or pipetted
manually. The risk assessment must include consideration of whether a MSC needs to be used.
The following work may also be conducted atCL2 following standard laboratory precautions, where this is consistent with
the terms of the local risk assessment for those activities:
diagnostic assays using whole blood, serum and plasma, including routine biochemistry and haematology, unless there
is a risk of generating aerosols
assays using virus-inactivated specimens, including molecular testing of inactivated specimens
examination of bacterial or fungal cultures
staining and microscopy of heat-fixed or chemically-fixed smears
centrifugation of routine blood samples. However, where there is infectious potential, samples must be centrifuged
using sealed centrifuge rotors or sample cups which are loaded and unloaded in a MSC.
6.2 Work that should be conducted within a MSC at CL2
Following completion of a suitable and sufficient risk assessment, the following work with samples potentially containing
SARS-CoV-2 may be conducted in aMSC at CL2:
preparation of specimens for molecular testing (for example respiratory virusPCR) prior to sample inactivation
division, aliquoting, or diluting of respiratory tract specimens, faecal specimens, urine specimens, and tissue specimens
in which virus has not been inactivated3
inoculation of bacterial or fungal culture media from high risk patients
urine antigen testing (such as for detection of Legionella pneumophila or Streptococcus pneumoniae)
rapid antigen tests of respiratory tract specimens
processing of any non-inactivated specimen that might result in the generation of aerosols
preparation and fixing (chemical or heat) of smears for microscopy
haematological or immunological work
rapid diagnostic tests for malaria parasites
Where risk assessment has identified that work should be conducted within anMSC at CL2 the following still applies to
work activities:
only fully trained and competent staff must undertake the work; in addition to this the level of training provided should
be appropriate to the level of risk and the complexity of the procedures being undertaken
inactivation methods must be in place before removal of sample fromMSC; these methods must be validated to ensure
effectiveness of the method (for example through use of a surrogate marker)
effective emergency procedures, including methods for dealing with spillage, are in place
waste routes for samples are appropriate forHG3 samples (see section 9).
6.3 Work to be conducted at CL3
The following work must be conducted atCL3:
any propagation, culturing or deliberate work onSARS-CoV-2 for diagnostic or research
7. Centrifugation
Centrifugation of specimens with infectious potential must be performed using sealed centrifuge rotors or sample cups
which are loaded and unloaded in a MSC.
8. Movement of samples within the laboratory
External surfaces of specimen containers and vials must be decontaminated using a disinfectant with proven activity
against enveloped viruses, prior to their removal from the MSC in CL3. Take care to avoid accidental contamination of the
exterior surfaces of all vessels and containers, regardless of containment level.
9. Packaging and transport of samples
Final packaging of potentially infectious specimens (for example, to send to a reference laboratory) may be performed at
CL2 if the specimens are already contained within a sealed and decontaminated primary container. Cultured samples for
research or calibration must be transported in accordance with Category A transportation regulations. All potentially
infectious samples must be transported in accordance with Category B transportation regulations (UN3373).
Public Health England (PHE) follows the guidance on regulations for the transport of infectious substances 2019 to 2020
,
published by the World Health Organization.
Sample type Dangerous goods
classification
Additional external labelling required for samples
sent to PHE
Recommended method of
transportation
Suspect patient sample Category B White label with Priority 10 printed in red Same day delivery courier
Presumptive positive patient
sample
Category B White label with Priority 20 printed in red Same day delivery courier
Confirmed positive samples for
follow up
Category B White label with Priority 20 printed in red Same day delivery courier
Contacts of known positive patients Category B White label with Priority 10 printed in red Same day delivery courier
Cultured samples for research or
calibration
Category A None Mandatory ADR approved Category
A courier
Sample type Dangerous goods
classification
Additional external labelling required for samples
sent to PHE
Recommended method of
transportation
9.1 Packaging samples being sent to PHE
For all packaged samples sent to PHE, make sure that:
packaging is clearly labelled ‘PRIORITY 10’ or ‘PRIORITY 20’ as specified above per sample type
contact details for reporting results are provided on the accompanying request form
accompanying paperwork is not placed inside the packaging with or within the primary container
See additional specific packaging guidance.
Transport using same day delivery courier is recommended for all sample types, except for cultured samples for research
or calibration which must be transported by an approved Category A carrier.
10. Cleaning and handling of waste
Irrespective of the containment level, work surfaces and equipment must be decontaminated after specimens have been
processed. Pay attention to all surfaces that may have come into contact with specimens or specimen containers.
Use a disinfectant solution or disinfectant wipe with proven activity against envelopedRNA viruses, in accordance with
local policies and following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Dispose of clinical waste according to local and national policies appropriate to the categorisation of the waste. Waste
from auto-analysers is unlikely to pose a significant risk due to the low sample volume and dilution steps, therefore special
waste disposal precautions are not recommended for auto-analyser waste.
11. Emergency procedures
Emergency procedures must be reviewed according to the results of risk assessments. Fumigation of laboratory spaces
will not be possible where samples are spilt outside of CL3, therefore consideration must be given to what to do in the
event of a spillage, and how effective decontamination of the area will be completed. Staff must be trained on updated
emergency procedures.
12. Maintaining service delivery
It is recommended that urgent and essential clinical diagnostic tests are not postponed pending the results ofSARS-CoV-
2 (COVID-19) testing, provided this is consistent with the local risk assessment for the planned work and that appropriate
containment measures are in place.
1. The International Committee for Taxonomy of Viruses named the causative virusSARS-CoV-2 on 7 Feb 2020 ↩
2. The World Health Organisation officially named the diseaseCOVID-19 on 11 February 2020 ↩
3. Inactivation refers to recognised processes that inactivate viral particles and render the virus replication incompetent,
for example, addition of nucleic acid extraction buffer containing guanidinium thiocyanate. The minimum requirement
would be the use of an extraction buffer containing guanidinium thiocyanate. Heat inactivation may also be used in
addition to this step, but this method would still require validation. ↩
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
