Isolate at home if sick
Observe quarantine if healthy but
were exposed to virus.
HELP FIGHT COVID-19.
KNOW
What is the novel coronavirus?
Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that cause
illness ranging from the common cold to more severe
diseases. The novel coronavirus is a new strain, not
previously identified in humans. COVID-19 is the
infectious disease caused by the latest discovered
coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2).
How does the virus spread?
People can catch COVID-19 from others who have the
virus through inhaling small droplets from people with
COVID-19 who cough or sneeze or through touching
contaminated surfaces.
What are the symptoms?
Many people who become infected experience mild
illness and recover, but it can be more severe for
others.
The symptoms include a combination of:
Fever
Cough
Difficulty breathing
Muscle pain
Tiredness
Insert national link here
www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/novel-coronavirus-china
PREPARE
How can you prepare yourself
Educate yourself on COVID-19 from trusted sources.
Keep physically active to ensure good physical
condition.
Have over-the-counter medicines and medical
supplies (e.g. tissues, thermometer) to treat fever.
If taking any prescription medicines, refill them, or
consider using a mail-order for your medications.
Have enough groceries and household items for
approximately 2-4 weeks. Prepare gradually and avoid
panic buying.
Activate your social network. Contact family, friends,
neighbours or community health care workers in
advance and make joint plans on what to do when
COVID-19 is spreading in your community or if you
become ill.
Practice social distancing if COVID-19 is spreading in
your community:
• Avoid crowds, especially in confined and poorly
ventilated spaces.
• Do your grocery shopping at off-peak hours.
• Avoid using public transport during rush hours.
• Exercise outdoors instead of indoor settings.
Follow instructions from national authorities on how to
prepare for emergencies.
Continue to practice general hygiene.
For further information:
[national website]
www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/novel-coronavirus-china
NATIONAL INFORMATION ON
COVID-19
[National information]
[National number +xx xxx xxx xxx]
ISOLATION
What is isolation at home?
Do not allow visitors.
Only household members who are caring for the person
suspected or confirmed of having COVID-19 should stay at
home.
Separate yourself from other people in the household.
Use facemasks, if you have one, when in the same room
with other people, to protect them.
Stay in a well-ventilated room with a window that can be
opened.
If a dedicated toilet is not available, the isolated person
should clean the toilet thoroughly after each use.
Use separate towels, eating utensils, drinking glasses,
bedding or any other household item commonly shared in
the family setting.
Activate your support system: ask friends, neighbours or
community health care workers for help to run essential
errands, e.g. grocery and medicine shopping.
Avoid direct contact when interacting with them, for
example, by arranging groceries to be dropped at the door.
Wash hands directly before and after any interaction with
others.
Follow the advice of your healthcare provider and call them
if your condition worsens.
QUARANTINE
What is quarantine?
How can you protect yourself and others
Quarantine refers to the separation and restriction of
movement of people who have potentially been
exposed to COVID-19, but who are currently healthy
and do not show symptoms. In general, quarantine
is mandatory and is mainly at home, duration is
minimum 14 days, but in specific situations can be
done in a hospital or in dedicated facilities.
If you are required or recommended by authorities to
quarantine at home, please take into consideration
the following:
Stay at home (i.e. don’t go to work, school or public
places) and:
• Self-monitor for appearance of COVID-19
symptoms, including fever of any grade, cough or
difficulty breathing. If symptoms develop, call your
local health care services for advice.
• If you become ill with symptoms of cough, fever
and difficulty breathing, use medical facemasks, to
protect those around you from getting infected.
• Arrange with your employer to work from home, if
possible.
• Clean and disinfect your home, particularly
frequently touched surfaces and toilettes.
Activate your support system: ask friends, neighbours
or community health care workers for help to run
essential errands, e.g. grocery and medicine
shopping.
Keep in touch with family and friends via telephone,
email or social media.
Keep yourself informed on COVID-19 from trusted
sources.
Keep physically active to ensure good physical and
mental condition.
For people with mild symptoms of COVID-19, hospitalisation
may not be necessary. Instead, healthcare providers may
recommend isolation at home, to limit further spread of the
virus.
Isolation at home, self-isolation or home isolation means
remaining at home or in a designated setting, in a single,
dedicated, adequately ventilated room and preferably using a
dedicated toilet. This measure can be recommended for people
while showing symptoms or for a certain period of time.
While in home isolation, observe the
following rules:
