MERS Daily Report (Sept. 12)
Contact: Moon Sang-jun, Division of Public Health Preparedness and Response
(043-719-9061, untohim@korea.kr)
◇ To strengthen the rapid and transparent sharing of information, the Korea Centers for Disease Control
Central Incident Management System (KCDC Central IMS) has announced that it will regularly release
a daily report (once per day) on situation and operations updates in MERS control and prevention measures.

Ⅰ. Operations Status (As of 12:00, Sept. 12)
 Case Overview
○ 1 Confirmed Case

Name

Sex

이OO

Age

M

Date of
Confirmation

Isolation Facility

Seoul National
University Hospital

61

Sept. 8

○ Suspected Case Reports and Testing Status
(Unit: Persons)

Date

As of 18:00,
Sept. 11
As of 12:00,
Sept. 12
Total

Suspected Case
Total

10
1
11

MERS Testing

Close
Casual
Contacts Contacts

1
0
1

9
1
10

- 1 -

Total

Positive

Negative

10
1
11

0
0
0

9
1
10

Awaiting
Results

1
0
1

 Close and Casual Contacts
○ Close Contacts (Active Surveillance*) : 21 individuals, no change as of yesterday
* Active Surveillance: Taking into consideration that these individuals had close contact with
the confirmed case, self-isolation and daily monitoring for potential symptoms are being
conducted
- Seoul (10), Incheon (7), Gyeonggi (2), Busan (1), Gwangju (1)
○ Casual Contacts (Active Monitoring*) : 435 individuals, an increase of 17 from yesterday (+17,
418→435)
* Active Monitoring: Taking into consideration that these individuals had low levels of contact
with the confirmed case, daily monitoring for potential symptoms is being conducted
* Casual contacts with unconfirmed whereabouts : 0 Korean nationals, 27 foreign nationals
(contact information obtained for 16 individuals)
- Casual contacts from same plane decreased by 11 (-11, 362→351), and other casual
contacts increased by 28 (+28, 56→84)
* Numbers were adjusted to exclude those who have left ROK and to include the confirmed
case’s coworkers, customers who used the same taxi after the confirmed case, and
airport security personnel

Ⅱ. Measures Taken
□ Status of Korean passengers on the same Kuwait->UAE flight as the confirmed case confirmed
○ There were six Korean nationals in addition to the confirmed case on the first leg of his
flight from Kuwait to the United Arab Emirates (EK860, Sept. 6 22:35). Of these six
individuals, five of them entered ROK.
○ One individual has been classified as a close contact and four have been classified as
casual contacts*; all of them are being monitored accordingly. The remaining one
passenger has not entered ROK but will undergo monitoring.
* One casual contact has been classified as a suspected case and will be released from
isolation following final negative test results
* The individual who has not entered ROK has been contacted and informed by text

- 2 -

○ 20 non-Korean passengers sitting close to the confirmed case did not enter ROK.
□ Customers who subsequently used the same taxi that the confirmed case had used have been
identified and contacted
○ Records showed that the taxi taken by the confirmed case made 24 other stops, and all
individuals (27 total passengers) have been identified and contacted. As of now, 26 of
the passengers have shown no symptoms, and the status of 1 individual is pending
confirmation.
* 26 individuals are being managed as casual contacts (the remaining 1 individual is
abroad and will undergo constant monitoring)
□ KCDC epidemiological officers and private experts to be dispatched to Kuwait
○ In response to the confirmed MERS case in ROK, the KCDC has announced that it will
send a team of its epidemiological officers and other private experts to Kuwait to
investigate possible routes of transmission, with the goal of strengthening efforts to
protect the health of Korean nationals abroad.
* The team will be sent following visa preparations
□ Number of negative pressure beds in the wards of nationally designated hospitals increased
○ Starting today, 8 wards (8 beds) are being operated at the Armed Forces Capital
Hospital, increasing the total number of nationally designated negative pressure
facilities to 158 wards (196 beds) at 28 hospitals as of Sept. 12.

Ⅲ. Message to the Public
□ KCDC announced that it is collaborating closely with the Seoul Metropolitan Government and
other local governments to conduct thorough contact tracing and management of the situation
to prevent further spread of the disease.
○ When visiting the Middle East, the general public is advised to maintain proper personal hygiene,
such as washing hands frequently, and to avoid visits to local farms, contact with camels,
consumption of raw camel meat or camel milk, and unnecessary visits to local medical facilities.

- 3 -

- Individuals are asked to cooperate with quarantine procedures, such as honestly completing
health status questionnaires at the time of entry, and to report any symptoms of fever, cough,
or shortness of breath within 2 weeks after returning home. Should individuals experience
such symptoms, they are advised to call the KCDC Call Center at 1339 or local public health
centers to report their symptoms before visiting hospitals.
○ Healthcare providers should check the travel history of incoming patients with respiratory symptoms
to see if they have recently traveled to the Middle East. The travel history of Korean nationals
can be checked through the Drug Usage Review (DUR) system, while that of foreign nationals
can be checked through direct interviews. Healthcare providers should report any patients
suspected of MERS-CoV infection to local public health centers or call the KCDC Call Center
at 1339.

* Additional information on the current situation will be provided upon further epidemiological
investigation to ensure rapid, accurate, and transparent communication with the public.

- 4 -

