HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 6th of April 2020, 51 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,220.
• Of the newly reported cases, only two cases were identified in
people entering or returning to Thailand; likely reflecting steps
taken to reduce the number of people entering the country.
• A total of 22 of the new cases are close contacts of previously
confirmed cases. Only three new cases are reported in
individuals whose work brings them into contact with large
numbers of people, suggesting that restrictions on gatherings
may be having some effect.
• 66 of 77 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed
cases of COVID-19.
Of all the cases reported, 1090 have occurred in Bangkok
• An analysis of how infection was transmitted between confirmed
cases in Bangkok and their contacts showed that contact
occurred mostly at home (35%), followed by in a social gathering
(21%), at work (22%), or in a crowded place (16%). In 5% of
cases the type of contact was unknown. A similar pattern is also
observed among cases occurring in the provinces, with most
transmission occurring at home (49%). This analysis further
highlights the ongoing need for strict adherence with social
distancing in all settings
• An additional 13 healthcare workers are included in the newly
reported cases, bringing the total number of healthcare workers
infected with COVID-19 to 50. To protect our healthcare workers
and the healthcare system, it is essential we all comply with
measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
EXPLAINER: Flattening the curve to protect our healthcare workers and the healthcare system
The evolution of an epidemic can be illustrated in a graph that shows the number of cases of infected people
over time. A steep increase in the number of cases per day will result in a higher curve, whereas a flatter curve
is seen with a more gradual increase in the number of cases per day.
Over a long period of time the number of people infected might be around the same, but the difference is the
number of cases that occur each day.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,220 confirmed (51 new)
26 deaths (3 new)
1,401 people hospitalized
50 healthcare staff infected (13 new)
23 severe cases
793 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 6 April 2020
This is critically important because there are limited numbers of hospitals, nurses and doctors, and the capacity
of the health system can be exceeded if too many people seek healthcare at the same time (red curve above).
The flatter the curve, the more likely it is that hospitals continue to deliver care to the people they serve (blue
curve).
The way we flatten the curve is by slowing down transmission of COVID-19.
Members of the public are in the front line and make the most important contribution: they flatten the curve by
following all the measures described below (Advice For The Public) to slow down transmission of COVID-19,
making sure that people don’t get sick and end up having to go to hospital.
Public health disease detectives help by chasing close contacts of cases and quarantining / isolating them as
soon as possible, so they can’t spread infection even further.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for essential activities (e.g. medical care, purchase food).
• Always try to maintain a distance of at least 1 metre from all other persons
• Use a surgical mask if you are sick. Do not use N95 masks- they are needed for healthcare workers.
• Wash your hands frequently with soap and water. An alcohol-based hand rub is also effective
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides information and advice to staff of the UN system in
Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
Healthcare workers are the last line of defence: as well as providing the
care that people need, they prevent spread of infection by isolating people
after they are already sick, and keeping them in hospital until they are
better.
We all need to do whatever we can to make sure our hospitals don’t get too
busy, and that they have all the resources they need to protect others and to
protect their staff, so they can stay at work for all of us.
