HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 28th of March 2020, 109 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand,
bringing the total number of cases to 1,245.
• Most newly reported cases are related to previously reported clusters;
others have returned from abroad or had occupational exposure to large
numbers of people (spa, hotel, restaurant, shops). Two new cases are
health personnel. The total number of COVID-19 cases in healthcare
workers is now eleven, but several of these individuals may have been
exposed in community settings.
• A majority of cases to date are male, and in the 20-49 age group: this is likely because so many cases are
linked to boxing stadiums, entertainment venues and to the Dakwah Pilgimage.
• Underlying conditions found among cases who are receiving treatment include hypertension, diabetes,
kidney disease and cancer. The Ministry of Public Health has requested younger people returning to their
home towns to self-quarantine to protect vulnerable older people, and strongly encourages older adults who
develop respiratory symptoms and fever to immediately seek care.
• Of the 76 Provinces in the country, 57 have now reported cases. Escalated measures are being
implemented according to the emergency decree in the Provinces where cases are concentrated, i.e.
• Central region: Bangkok and its neighbouring provinces
• Eastern region: Chonburi, Pattaya, Rayong
• Southern region: Songkhla Pattani, Narathiwat, Yala
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 28 March 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
total and new cases reported
in the last 24 hours
1245 confirmed (109 new)
6 deaths (1 new)
1139 people being treated
17 severe cases
100 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 28 March 2020
Blue = Cumulative number cases Red = daily case count
People leaving
Bangkok
Contact tracing
of 132 people
from Dakwah
pilgrimage
Cases from
boxing
stadium and
entertainment
venues
One positive
result needed
for confirmation
instead of two
ANALYSIS
The spike in the number of daily cases reported on 22nd
March was due to a change in the policy on laboratory
testing for COVID-19. Before 22nd
March every case had to be confirmed by two separate tests, taken a day
apart. The policy then changed so that only a single test was required. As a result, the 188 cases reported on
22nd
March represented two days of positive results instead of one (the total of 188 included all the cases who
initially tested positive on 21st
March getting their second positive result on 22nd
March, and all the cases getting
their first - and only - positive result on 22nd
March).
The proportion of COVID-19 cases detected outside of Bangkok is increasing further; cases have now been
reported in 3/4 of Thailand’s provinces. Sub-national public health capacity is robust, including extensive
networks of Rapid Response Teams and Village Health Volunteers. These networks will work to identify
suspected cases, ensure they are quickly isolated from others, treat them and trace and quarantine their close
contacts. Rapidly separating infected persons from others minimizes opportunities for spread of the virus and
is effective in preventing disease in the population. The goal is to interrupt spread and contain COVID-19 in
every affected Province.
Everyone can play their part by staying at home when possible, maintaining 1-2 m distance from others if they
must go out, washing hands frequently with soap and water or an alcohol-based sanitizer, avoiding touching
the mouth and nose, and observing respiratory hygiene (coughing into flexed elbow or a tissue which is
disposed of safely). Anyone who has recently travelled to any province from Bangkok in the past 14 days, and
who develops symptoms of COVID-19, should separate themselves from others, wear a mask and seek medical
attention immediately.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for essential activities (e.g. medical care, purchase food).
• Always try to maintain a distance of at least 1.5 meters from all other persons.
• Wash your hands frequently. An alcohol-based hand rub is also effective
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
• If unwell, wear a mask. Do not use N95 respirators as supplies are limited and they are critically needed for
healthcare workers.
• Cough or sneeze into your elbow or a clean tissue. Dispose of tissues immediately and wash your hands.
• Do not shake hands, embrace, share eating utensils or smoking devices with other people.
• Keep all commonly touched surfaces clean. Advice on cleaning practices and the survivability of the SARS-
CoV-2 virus on surfaces & in different settings is available here.
MEDIA
• WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak and through its website provides
relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies. Media queries can be directed to
sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
• WHO Thailand’s Twitter and Facebook accounts post useful information on hygiene and protection, such
as when and how to use masks, as well as relevant WHO technical guidelines and other content related to
the novel coronavirus situation in Thailand and globally.
WHO THAILAND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
• Limit transmission to citizens and health care workers
• Train and equip healthcare facilities to manage large numbers of COVID-19 patients
• Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission, viral shedding, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines
• Communicate risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation
• Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
• Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.
• With WHO support, the National Institute of Health is supporting specimen testing for other countries as
requested.
• Visitors to Thailand traveling from affected areas are being screened on arrival. Possible illnesses may be
reported to the Department of Disease Control using the 1422 hotline.
• The Ministry has introduced a self-reporting online tool, available in Thai, English and Chinese, which can
be accessed here.
What WHO is doing in Thailand
• WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of
Public Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates
• WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand.
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
• The International Health Regulations (IHR) can be viewed here.
• The Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422 (dialed from within Thailand).
• The Thai Communicable Diseases Act (revised in 2015) is available here.
• For a comprehensive COVID-19 global case-tracker, access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre for
Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE): in English and Thai.
• For information on Global research on the novel coronavirus.
• The Global Health Network - Coronavirus Outbreak Knowledge Hub - a pop-up area on The Global Health
Network serves as a knowledge hub and access to guidance on COVID-19.
(Note: WHO does not take responsibility for content on external websites.)
For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the COVID-19 outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
