HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 15th
of April 2020, 30 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,643.
• Of these, almost 57% (1,497) have recovered, about 1.5% (43)
have died, and about 41.5% (1,103) are receiving treatment.
• Of the newly reported cases, 2 were identified in people returning
from outside Thailand. To reduce transmission from imported cases,
all persons returning from other countries will be quarantined in
state-arranged venues.
• The total number of infected healthcare workers remains at 102 (4%
of all cases). To protect healthcare workers and the healthcare
system, it is essential that everyone complies with measures to
reduce transmission of COVID-19.
• A total of 19 of the new cases are close contacts of previously
confirmed cases. Two of the new cases are reported in individuals
who attended crowded places.
• 68 of 77 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed cases of
COVID-19. Bangkok has the highest number of cases (1,328),
followed by Phuket (190) and Nonthaburi (149).
• The Civil Aviation Authority of Thailand (CAAT) has extended the
restrictions on international flights to Thailand until 30 April 2020.
More information is available at
https://www.caat.or.th/th/archives/49587
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,643 confirmed (30 new)
43 deaths (2 new)
1,103 people hospitalized
102 healthcare staff infected
1,497 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 15 April 2020
UPDATE ON MEASURES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH OF THAILAND:
Guidelines for crowded places in the context of COVID-19
• In collaboration with University experts, the Department of Health (DoH) has assessed several ‘at-risk’
(crowded) settings and develop guidelines for slums, construction sites and markets. The guidance and
related recommendations have been distributed to entrepreneurs and members of the public. DoH plans
to develop an online map showing markets that meet criteria for good hygiene arrangements.
Support for non-Thai/migrant workers
• The Ministry of Public Health is aware of the vulnerability of non-Thai/migrant workers who remain in
Thailand. Their employers should ensure availability of hygienic facilities and facilitate access to health
care as needed. Related guidelines are being developed to ensure protection from COVID-19.
KEY MESSAGES FROM THE NEW WHO GUIDANCE ON FACE MASKS IN THE COMMUNITY:
• It is critical that medical masks and respirators be prioritized for health care workers.
• The use of nonmedical masks made of other materials (e.g., cotton fabric) in the community setting
has not been well evaluated. There is no current evidence to make a recommendation for or against
their use in this setting.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health
to support migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
The number of cases reported daily in Thailand appears to be tapering
off but this does not mean we can afford to stop adhering to measures
such as physical distancing.
The lower case numbers may be a direct result of implementing such
measures, but we need to continue with them to avoid a new spike in
infections.
This is a marathon, not a sprint.
It is vital that we all continue to follow health advice and measures to
contain the virus.
Please watch and share our video on physical distancing and ensure
you maintain a distance of at least 1 metre between yourself and
others.
