The Government of Japan
Expert Meeting on the Novel Coronavirus Disease Control
"Views on the Novel Coronavirus Disease Control"
(Summary Version)
March 9, 2020
1. Japan's basic strategy for preventing the spread of infection
The three pillars of Japan's strategy are, "early detection of and early response to
clusters," "early patient diagnosis and enhancement of intensive care and the securing of
a medical service system for the severely ill," and "behavior modification of citizens."
This strategy is in line with the strategy recommended by the World Health
Organization (WHO).
2. Current infection situation in Japan
Currently, the number of infectious cases is trending upward. However, overall,
approximately 80% of the domestic confirmed carriers, regardless of the severity of their
symptoms, did not infect others.
Additionally, there are cases where the creation of clusters have been found relatively
quickly. This has led to the slowing down of the rate of increase in infectious cases
compared to other countries where infectious cases are increasing rapidly.
In the expert meeting’s views announced on February 24, we stated that "the next one-
to-two weeks are a critical moment regarding whether the outbreak spreads rapidly or is
controlled." However, based on the above circumstances, Japan's situation as of today is
not moving toward an explosive spread of infections, and appears to be somewhat holding
steady.
Yet, the number of infectious cases is expected to continue to grow for some time, with
some temporary increases and decreases. Additionally, as mentioned below, since there is
an approximately two-week time lag when ascertaining the status of the infection—which
prevents us from getting a full picture of the infection status—we cannot let our guard
down yet.
3. Patients who develop severe symptoms
In Japan, the number of deaths is not increasing significantly. This indicates that even
with limited medical resources, doctors in Japan are able to detect patients who may
develop severe symptoms and are providing proper care, indicating high quality of their
medical service.
4. Measures taken in Hokkaido (*) to "reduce contact among people as much as
possible"
In Hokkaido 1
, the governor declared a "state of emergency for the novel coronavirus"
on February 28, 2020. More time is needed to obtain the initial data for examining the
effects of the measure. This is because the incubation period for this infectious disease,
from infection to onset, is five days on average, and the average time from onset to
reporting is known to take approximately eight days on average, which means the data
we are seeing today captures the situation of the newly infected from approximately two
weeks prior. The analysis of the effects of this measure is scheduled to be announced
around March 19.
5. Long-term outlook
Even if the domestic spread is contained at this moment, it is expected that for some
time, a second wave can come at any time. Additionally, given the ongoing worldwide
outbreak, infections entering from abroad are expected to continue to repeat.
It is anticipated that in areas where the rapid spread of infection is expected, we will be
taking measures repeatedly for a long time to balance the continuation of socio-economic
activities and outbreak prevention.
6. What we ask of you
The locations where mass infections were confirmed so far are places where the
following three conditions were met simultaneously: (1) closed space with poor
ventilation, (2) crowded with many people and (3) conversations and vocalization in close
proximity (within arm's reach of one another). It is believed that more people were
infected in such places. Therefore, we ask that you predict locations and settings where
these three conditions could occur simultaneously and avoid them.
We do not have enough scientific evidence yet on how significantly such actions can
reduce the risk of spreading infection. However, since places with poor ventilation and
crowded places are increasing infections, we ask that you take precautions even before
scientific evidence for clear standards is found.
We at the expert meeting ask that all citizens participate in this fight with the infectious
disease.
*One of the areas in Japan where infection is spread the most at this point
