Model Micro-Plan
Micro Plan for Containing Local Transmission of
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Epicentre --------------
------------ Block, ------------ District,
------------ State
2
Micro-plan for Containing Local Outbreak of COVID-19
Geographic Location: ------Municipality, ------- Block, ------- District, ------- State
1. Objective of the micro-plan
To contain the outbreak of COVID-19 in defined geographic area
2. Demographic details (for each district coming under containment and buffer
zones separately, as defined in Section 3)
District details
District area:
District Population:
No of Blocks:
No of Municipalities:
Block Details
Name of Block:
Population:
Number of Villages:
3. Mapping the affected area
The containment zone will be decided by the RRT based on the extent of
cases/contacts listed and mapped by them. However if contact listing/ mapping is
taking time (>12-24 hours), then on arbitrary basis demarcate an area of 3 Kms radius
around the epicenter (the residence of the positive case). This area of 3 km radius will be
the containment zone. If required, based on the mapping of contacts and cases, the
containment zone will be refined.
A buffer zone of an additional 5 Kms radius (7 Kms in rural areas)/administrative
boundary of including neighboring districts/per-urban zone shall also be identified, as
detailed in the cluster containment plan.
3.1 Affected area (Containment Zone – As per Cluster Containment Plan)
Name of the epicentre: Municipality ward/ village:
Number of affected Municipalities /villages:
Number of Villages/ Wards in Containment Zone:
Number of houses in containment zone:
Population in Containment Zone:
3
3.2 Buffer Zone – As per Cluster Containment Plan
Number of Municipalities /villages:
Number of Villages/ Wards in Buffer Zone:
Number of houses in Buffer zone
Population in Buffer Zone:
3.3 The containment zone will be divided into sectors with 50 houses each (30 houses
in difficult areas). The sectors will facilitate all activities for containment as described in
the ensuing sections/ paragraphs.
Every confirmed case has to be considered as an epicenter and micro-plan activities
will be done as described above.
Divide the area into sectors. List them with name (of village) and identified nodal officer.
Listing of Sectors
Sector Name of Sector Nodal Officer Contact number
A
B
C
D
4. Human Resource
4.1. Administrative and Technical Personnel
The District Collector/District Magistrate will be Nodal person for cluster containment in
their respective districts.
S. No Name Designation Contact
Number (O)
Mobile
1 DM/District Collector
2 ADM
3 CDMO
4 BDO
5 Block MO
6 Block AHO
7 BEE
8 NHM Block Manager
4
State RRT
S. No. Name Designation Contact
Number (O)
Mobile
1
2
3
District RRT
S. No. Name Designation Contact
Number (O)
Mobile
1
2
3
4.2. Human Resource for operations / field activities
4.2.1 Responsibilities assigned to various functionaries
4.2.1.1 ASHA/ ANM/ Anganwadi worker*:
4.2.1.1.1. Daily house to house visit to:
(i) Search clinically suspect cases.
(ii) Identify contacts of confirmed and suspect cases
(iii) Maintain line list of suspect/ confirmed cases and contacts
(iv) Monitor contacts daily
(v) Inform Supervisory Medical Officer about suspect cases and their contacts
(vi) Create awareness among community about disease prevention, home quarantine, common
signs and symptoms and need for reporting suspect cases by distributing fliers, pamphlets
and also by inter-personal communication.
4.2.1.1.2. Counsel individuals to take precautions to avoid contact with those with
symptoms suggestive of COVID-19.
4.2.1.1.3. Ensure that contacts are on home quarantine use 3 layered surgical masks at all
times. Educate them on proper use and disposal of masks. The team will also educate the
family members about precautions to be taken while taking care of persons under home
quarantine.
* If there is human resource constraint to engage as many ASHA/AWW/ANMs, then
Indian Red Cross society/NDRF/Civil Defence/NSS/NCC volunteers available in the
district shall be engaged after proper briefing on roles and responsibilities and infection,
prevention and control practices.
5
4.2.1.2. LHV/ MPWMW
 Supervisory duty at the village/ block covering the epicenter.
 Daily visit to allocated sectors to oversee and cross-check the activities of
ASHA/Anganwadi workers/ ANM.
Report on real time basis, any person reporting of symptoms of COVID-19.
4.2.1.3. Block Extension Educator and other communication staff
 Public information education and communication campaign targeting schools,
colleges, work place, self-help groups, religious leaders, teachers, postman etc.
 Arrangement of miking.
4.2.1.4. Municipal/ village Panchayat staff / Civil society volunteers
 Create awareness in the community
 Encouraging community to follow frequent hand wash, respiratory etiquettes, self-
monitoring of health and reporting to the health workers about persons in their
vicinity having cough, fever, breathing difficulty.
4.2.1.5. Supervisory Officer
 Supervises the field work
 Verifies suspect case as per case definition.
 Arranging shifting of suspect case to health facility.
 Random Check of persons under home quarantine.
 Submit daily report to control room
4.2.1.6 Block NHM Manager/ any other designate of DM
 Information management with in the containment zone
 Contingency funding of the containment operations
 Managing finances.
4.2.2. Norms for deployment of human resource:
A health care worker (ANM/ ASHA/Anganwadi Worker) will be able to visit 50 houses
in a day (30 in difficult areas).
A supervisory Medical Officer shall be deployed to cover 1000 population.
6
4.2.2 Human Resource requirement for field operations
S.
No.
Designation of staff Nature of work
assigned
No. of
personnel
deployed for
containment
operation
Mobilized
from within
the District
Mobilized from
adjoining
District
1. District Collector or
his assignee
Incident Command
2 Central/ State RRT Planning and
operations
3 Sector Medical
Officers
Supervisory
4 LHV Intermediate
Supervisory
5 ANM/ ASHA/
Anganwadi Worker
Field work
6 Block Extension
Educator and other
communication staff
IEC
7 Municipal/ village
Panchayat staff
Civil society
volunteers
Community
mobilization
8 NHM -District/ Block
Manager
Logistics
Information
Management
Financial management
5. Components of Micro-plan
5.1 Surveillance
5.1.1. Active Surveillance
5.1.1.1. Constituting Teams for Human Health Surveillance:
Each health worker would cover 50 houses in the sector assigned to them. The listing of
municipality wards/ villages allocated to surveillance teams, their names, name of
supervisors for each team and their contact number is at Annexure-I
5.1.1.2. Assigning Tasks to the Teams
The Medical Officer in-charge will assign tasks as listed in para 4.2.1 to the Supervisory
Officer/ANM/ASHA/Anganwadi Worker.
7
During the course of their house to house visit, the ANM/ASHA/Anganwadi Worker will
identify suspect case, if any, as per case definition. The name, age, sex, and the address of
such persons to be recorded on proforma at Annexure-II. The Health worker will
counsel household members to take basic precautions to avoid direct contact with a
suspect case. He / she will provide a mask to the (i) suspect case (till such time he/she is
examined by the supervisory officer).
The concerned ANM/ASHA/Anganwadi Worker will immediately inform his/her
supervisory officer about the suspect case.
5.1.1.3. Role of Supervisory Medical Officer/ LHV
The door to door surveillance will be supervised by Medical Officers/ LHV assigned
sectors within the defined surveillance zone. He/she will also collect data from the health
workers under him/ her, collate and provide the cumulative data to the control room by
4.00 P.M.
He / she will visit any suspect case brought to his/ her notice by the
ANM/ASHA/Anganwadi Worker during their daily house to house visit. He/ she will
immediately call for the ambulance and ensure transfer of the patient to identified
hospital after ensuring on the basic precautions. Details of the registration number of the
ambulance, shifting time to the hospital and contact number will be kept and conveyed to
the Control Room.
Name of
the patient
being
shifted
Age Sex Ambulance
No.
Name of the
driver/
Paramedic
Contact
number
Time of
Shifting
5.1.2. Passive Surveillance
All health facilities in the containment and buffer zones will be listed. All such facilities
both in Government and Private sector (including clinic) shall report clinically suspect
cases of COVID-19 to the identified supervisory officer for that sector. Proforma for
reporting suspect COVID-19 cases by health facilities is at Annexure-III.
6 Contact Tracing
The contacts of the laboratory confirmed cases/ suspect cases of COVID-19 will be line-
listed. The Supervisory officer in whose jurisdiction, the laboratory confirmed case/
suspect case falls shall inform the Control Room about all the contacts and their
residential addresses. The control room will in turn inform the supervisory officers of
concerned sectors for surveillance of the contacts.
8
These contacts will be tracked by assigned ANM/ASHA/Anganwadi Worker of that
sector and kept under home quarantine for 14 days. They will be monitored for clinically
compatible signs and symptoms of COVID-19 for 28 days in total. If the residential
address of the contact is beyond the containment zone or in adjoining district / State, the
district IDSP will inform the concerned District IDSP.
Detail guidance for contact tracing, quarantine and isolation is given at Annexure –IV.
Proforma for line listing of contacts is at Annexure-V.
7. Laboratory Support
The microbiologist in the Central/State RRT will be responsible for managing laboratory
Support. He/ She will identify nearest VRDL network laboratory for logistic support for
sample collection, packaging and transportation. The doctors manning the isolation
facility will be trained by the RRT and they shall be responsible for sample collection,
packaging and transportation. The sample collection proforma to be attached with the
samples is at Annexure-VI.
Name of the VRDL
Laboratory
Name of Nodal person Contact number
8. Identified Health Facility
8.1. The Physician in the RRT will visit the nearby hospitals and identify the nearest
hospital best suited for isolation and tertiary care/ medical college best suited for
Ventilator management/ critical care management/ Salvage therapy (ECMO).
Name of the identified
health facility
Name and Contact
details of MS
Name and
contact details of
Nodal officer
Contact details
of Emergency
The details of the identified facilities will be informed to all the Supervisory Officers
by the NHM District/ Block manager.
All suspect cases of COVID-19 will be admitted to the above identified health
facility. The Supervisory Medical Officer, in whose Jurisdiction the case is reported,
9
shall ensure his/ her hospitalization. The hospital will be informed in advance about
the referral case.
Reporting format for health facilities identified for isolation/critical care management
of COVID-19 cases is at Annexure III.
8.2. Ambulance facility
There will be earmarked ambulance for the transfer of patients. The drivers will be
trained in infection prevention and control practices and also in disinfection of ambulance
after transporting suspect cases. Drivers of these ambulances will be provided with
appropriate PPE depending on the risk assessment conducted by district/RRT
epidemiologist.
Date Shift Name of the
driver
Name of the
Paramedic
Contact numbers
(Driver and
Paramedic)
8:00 AM –
2:00 PM
2:00 PM –
8:00 PM
8:00 PM –
8:00 AM
8.3 Hospital infection prevention and Control
The Microbiologist in the RRT will train the health workers on infection prevention control
practices prior to their field assignment. They will also train the identified field
functionaries on donning and doffing of PPE. The PPEs are to worn as per the risk
assessment for various categories of personnel.
S. No Name of the item Remarks
1 Full complement of PPE (N
95 Mask, Gloves, Goggles,
coveralls, headgear, foot
wear)
To be used by:
 Doctors attending to patients in health
facilities in the containment zone and
referral hospital for isolation/ critical
care, where aerosolization can occur (like
intubation, non-invasive ventilation,
tracheostomy, and manual ventilation
before intubation, suction etc.)
 Doctors collecting samples.
 EMTs attending patient in ambulances
 Staff in the laboratories
2 N-95 Mask and gloves  To be used by supervisory doctors
verifying a suspect case
10
 Doctors/nurses attending patients in
screening clinics/OPD
3 N-95 mask, gloves  Sanitary workers involved in sanitation
and disinfection activities for COVID-19
cases
4 Triple Layer medical mask/
examination gloves
To be used by:
 field workers,
 suspect cases and
 care giver / by stander of the suspect case
 Ambulance drivers.
 All functionaries at the perimeter control.
10. Logistics
10.1. PPE
All PPE will be used rationally. RRT members will train the identified field
functionaries on donning and doffing of PPE. The PPEs are to worn as per the risk
assessment for various category of personnel.
The following daily log on PPE will be maintained:
S. No. Name of the item Opening
balance for
the day
Nos. used
with in the
day
Closing
balance
Remarks
1 PPE Kits
2 N-95 Mask
3 Triple Layer
Surgical mask
4 Gloves
5 Biohazard bags
All PPEs to be disposed of in a Biohazard Bag (yellow). The outer surface will be
disinfected using 1% Sodium Hypochlorite spray.
11. Communication
Block Extension Educator / or any other designated communication staff will be allocated
the work of public education outreach on COVID-19. Public information education and
communication campaign shall target schools, colleges and work place within the
11
containment zone. The key messages (including that used for Inter-personal
Communication) have already been conveyed to the States.
The sector wise allocation of BEE their name and contact no. will be listed. Municipal/
Village Panchayat Officers will be allocated sectors with in the surveillance zone for
encouraging and participating in public awareness campaigns and participation. The
rostering of staff for public education outreach is at Annexure-VIII.
12 . Data Management
The Control Room will have data managers (deployed from IDSP/ NHM) responsible for
collecting, collating and analyzing data from field and health facilities. They will work in
3 shifts. Data Collection tools will form Annexure-IX of this document. Output variables
to be generated at micro level on daily basis;
No. of Suspect case of COVID-19
No. of laboratory confirmed case
No. of deaths
No. of contacts line listed:
No. of contacts tracked:
No. of contacts currently under surveillance:
No. of contacts which have exited the follow up period of 28 days:
13. Control Room
The following details will be provided under this head:
Nodal Officer with contact number:
Control Room Number:
14. Office orders (indicative)
Orders on notification.
Order for taking services of personnel
15. Budgeting (indicative)
S.no Item Unit cost Total cost
1. Transportation
No. of vehicles hired
POL expenditure for Office
vehicles/ ambulances
2. Communication
Cost of printing posters
Hiring personnel for display
of posters
12
Cost of hiring vehicles for
miking
Advertisement cost :
local dailies
cable network
local TV channels
SMS
3 Logistics
Three layered surgical mask
N 95 mask
PPE
4 Contingency Expenditure
13
Annexures
Annexure No. Subject
I Containment zone: Identified Sectors for surveillance
II Data collection tool at field level
Data collection tool at field level (Field Level Data
Compilation Sheet)
III Daily Line listing of Patients detected at health facilities
IV Recommended guidance for contact tracing, quarantine and
isolation for Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
V Line listing of Contacts
VI Sample collection proforma to be attached with the samples
VII Transportation arrangement for containment Operation
VIII Identified Sectors for Public Education Outreach and rostering
of identified communication staff
IX Daily report of COVID-19 Outbreak
14
Annexure-I
Containment zone: Identified Sectors for surveillance
Sector Name of
Municipal
ward/ village
Name of ANM/
ASHA/Anganwadi
Worker
Contact
Number
Name of
Supervisory
Officer
Contact
Number
15
Annexure-II
Data collection tool at field level
(Line listing of suspect cases)
State & District :
Sector :
Village allocated: :
Name of the field worker : Phone:
Name of the Supervisor : Phone:
Name of the PHC doctor : Phone:
S.No Name of patient Age Sex Address
c/o Fever,
Cough,
Difficulty
in
breathing
Remarks
Data collection tool at field level (Field Level Data Compilation Sheet)
S.
No.
Name of
village
Total
population
surveyed
M F
No. of
Suspect cases
identified
Total
number of
contacts put
under home
quarantine
Remarks
Total
16
Annexure-III
Daily Line listing of Patients detected at health facilities
S. No Name Age Sex Address
Symptoms or
contact with
COVID-19
suspect case
Sample
taken
(Y/N)
Remarks
17
Appendix- IV
Recommended guidance for contact tracing, quarantine and isolation for
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19):
I. Contact Tracing:
a. Contact means a person:
 Providing direct care without proper personal protective equipment (PPE)
for COVID-19 patients
 Staying in the same close environment of a COVID-19 patient (including
workplace, classroom, household, gatherings).
 Traveling together in close proximity (1 m) with a COVID-19 patient in
any kind of conveyance within a 14‐day period after the onset of symptoms
in the case under consideration.
b. Each worker or person responsible for contact tracing should:
 Enlist all the contacts for tracing along with their names, address and
contact details and submit to the supervisor daily
 Daily visit the contact and ask him/her if had developed any fever, cough,
shortness of breath, difficulty in breathing etc.)
 Educate contacts and their family members on importance of contact
tracing and home quarantine
 Distribute Triple layer surgical masks to the contact and keep sufficient
stock.
 Create awareness on symptoms and provide information on self-health
monitoring
 Contacts should be informed that if they develop symptoms:
o Immediately wear a triple layer mask and avoid close contact with any
other person.
o Inform concerned health worker who will arrange for medical
examination by supervisory medical officer and transportation to
hospital, if required.
o Provide details on all possible contacts since the time he/she has
developed symptoms and inform health worker
 Duration of follow up of contacts would be 28 days from the time of last
contact with a case
18
II. Active surveillance:
Active surveillance shall be done within containment zone (or 3 Km radius from
the periphery of the affected area)
What has to be done:
 Enlist all houses (and persons)
 Daily visits to each house and enquire about any person developing any
symptoms (like fever, cough, shortness of breath, difficulty in breathing
etc.)
 In case of a person is detected to be developing symptoms of COVID-19,
the same shall be brought to notice of supervisory medical officer
 Daily reporting: as per the format (Annexure V)
III. Home Quarantine:
 Who has to be quarantined: all households and close contacts of a
confirmed and suspect cases are to be home quarantined
 Duration of home quarantine: Those being home quarantined need to be
followed up till the time test results of suspect case (whose contacts are
being home quarantined and followed up) comes negative. If the test result
comes positive then all such persons become ‘true’ contacts and have to be
home quarantined for 14 days and followed up for 28 days.
IV. Isolation:
 Suspect cases detected on active surveillance need to be in isolated in a
room in the house temporarily till the time he/she is examined by the
supervisory medical officer or shifted by the designated ambulance to the
designated health facility.
 Following shifting to health facility, place of temporary isolations needs to
be disinfected in accordance with prescribed SOPs by 1% sodium
hypochlorite
19
Appendix V
Line listing of Contact (Name of Patient): ______________________________
S.
N
o.
Name Age Sex Address
Date
on
which
expose
d
To be
under
surveill
ance
(till
date)
Symptoma
tic (Y/N).
If Yes, is
person
isolated/re
ferred
Sample
taken
(Y/N)
Remar
ks
(Please use separate sheet for contacts of different patients)
20
Annexure VI
Sample collection proforma to be attached with the samples
21
22
Appendix-VII
Transportation arrangement for containment Operation
Sector Name of the
Sector
Purpose for
Vehicle
Deployed
Vehicle
Regn.
number
Driver
name
Contact
Number
A House to house
surveillance
Supervisory
Staff
B House to house
surveillance
Supervisory
Staff
C House to house
surveillance
Supervisory
Staff
23
Appendix-VIII
Identified Sectors for Public Education Outreach and rostering of identified
communication staff
Sector Name of
Municipal ward/
village
Name of
Municipal/
Panchayat
staff
Contact
Number
Name of
Supervisory
BEE
Contact
Number
24
Appendix-IX
Cluster Containment
Format for daily report of COVID-19 virus disease
Date :
State: District: Block : Epicentre:
Total No. of Village in the block: No. of affected Municipalty /village:
A) A 1 Population Based Information No. of villages/municipality/localities
Population
Surveyed(Daily)
Population surveyed
(Cumulative)
0-3 Km Population from Epicenter
A-2 Morbidity data
Daily Cumulative
Persons with fever / symptoms consistent (only
new Cases) with COVID-19 virus disease 0-3 Km from Epicenter
B) Hospital based Information: Name of Hospital - ……………………………………………………………………………
In patient Daily Cumulative
Suspect COVID-19 viral disease cases
Laboratory Confirmed case of COVID-19 virus disease
No of deaths (suspected or confirmed)
D) Contact Tracing
Number of contacts under surveillance
E) Laboratory Testing Number of Samples taken Number of Samples found Positive
Daily Cumulative Daily Cumulative
25
F) Public Education outreach No of houses in
0-3 km
No. of houses
Visited Percentage
Villages covered by Public Education Outreach
G) Monitoring Health Staff
Health personnel deployed in field including
medical officers, Health supervisors/health
workers etc.
Health personnel deployed in field
complaining of Fever/ symptoms
consistent with COVID-19 virus
disease
Hospital staff including Medical Officers, Nurses,
Attendants etc.
Hospital staff complaining of Fever/
symptoms consistent with COVID-19
virus disease
H) Stock Position
Item
Previous days stock at District HQ Consumed for the day Stock at hand( s)
Stock to be requisitioned if
any
PPE
N-95 Masks
Triple layer surgical
mask
Note: Daily report to be faxed by 11.00 a.m.
· Director NCDC (Fax No: 011-23922677; 011-23921401) Signature DSO
· Director EMR ( Fax No: 011- 23061457) (Name & Desg. Of the reporting officer)
Phone No.
of DSO
26
