Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: guidance for managing a funeral during
the coronavirus pandemic
Published 19 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for managing a funeral during the coronavirus pandemic
Public Health
England
Contents
Main principles
What you need to know
Background
Management of the venue
Social distancing for mourners
Who should attend?
Mourners who are symptomatic
Main principles
This advice is designed to assist people who are involved in managing or organising a funeral related to a death from any
cause during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
This guidance has been developed to ensure that:
bereaved people are treated with sensitivity, dignity and respect
mourners and workers involved in the management of funerals are protected from infection
Guidance for workers who care for the deceasedis available.
This guidance remains under review and may be updated in line with the changing situation.
What you need to know
The grieving process and related formal and informal rituals, through which the bereaved mourn the passing of loved
ones, are important for the health and wellbeing of the bereaved. The following guidance aims to balance the needs of the
bereaved to mourn appropriately, whilst minimising the spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) infection. It details where
exceptions can be made to the stay at home guidance currently in place. These exceptions only apply to the
circumstances relating to the death of a member of the same household, a close family member or a friend.
Communities, organisations and individuals are strongly advised to take action to reduce the risk of spreading coronavirus
(COVID-19) infection among mourners who are gathered to pay their respects, with a particular focus on protecting people
who are clinically vulnerable and more likely to develop severe illness. These actions include:
restricting the number of mourners to be as low as possible to ensure a safe distance of at least 2 metres (6 ft) can be
maintained between individuals
alongside the Funeral Director, Chapel Attendant, and funeral staff only the following should attend:
members of the person’s household
close family members
or if the above are unable to attend, close friends
attendance of a celebrant of choice, should the bereaved request this
For the position of what is lawful, you should refer specifically to theRegulations (see at the end of this guidance for
details).
mourners should also follow the advice on social distancing when travelling to and from the funeral gathering
mourners who are self-isolating for 14 days due to someone in their household being unwell with symptoms of
coronavirus (COVID-19) but are not symptomatic themselves should be facilitated to attend the funeral in person
should they wish to do so, with processes put in place to minimise the risk of transmission
mourners who are clinically vulnerable or in a shielded group should also be facilitated to attend, with processes put in
place to minimise the risk of transmission
any mourner who is showing coronavirus (COVID-19) symptoms (a new continuous cough or a high temperature)
should not attend the funeral as they pose a risk to others; remote participation should be considered
Background
There is an increased risk of transmission of coronavirus (COVID-19) where families and communities come together
following the death of a loved one, from any cause. Whilst recognising the importance of these rituals and gatherings, it is
strongly advised that the actions detailed in this guidance are taken to reduce the spread of infection, particularly to
clinically vulnerable people who are at risk of severe illness.
For deaths that are suspected or confirmed as being due to coronavirus (COVID-19) it is recognised that household
members of the deceased person may have already been exposed to coronavirus (COVID-19) during the course of the
preceding illness. However, steps should be taken to minimise any new exposure, especially where individuals who are
not part of the household and those at risk of severe illness may come into contact with the virus.
Mourners who are self-isolating due to a possible case of coronavirus (COVID-19) in their household
Mourners who are extremely clinically vulnerable
Personal care of deceased people
Experiencing grief or bereavement
The government has advised that funeral services should continue and has requested that Local Authorities consider how
they can facilitate this.
Funerals with physical attendance of mourners should continue as long as those attending adhere to this guidance, which
details how the risk of transmission can be reduced. (This guidance does not however apply to issues of transportation to
funerals).
To ensure that organisations managing funerals are able to cope with the increased number of deaths,
it is important
that funerals are not delayed. We understand how difficult this will be for the families and friends of lost loved ones,
however the current guidance will be in place for the foreseeable future for the safety of the public
.
Management of the venue
Those organising a funeral should adhere to the following advice:
restrict the number of mourners who attend so that a safe distance of at least 2 metres (6 ft) can be maintained
between individuals
the size and circumstance of the venue will determine the maximum number that can be accommodated whilst also
facilitating social distancing, but numbers should be minimised as far as possible. Venue managers may set caps on
numbers in order to ensure this
only the following should attend, alongside the Funeral Director, Chapel Attendant, and funeral staff:
members of the person’s household
close family members
or if the above are unable to attend, close friends
attendance of a celebrant of choice, should the bereaved request this
mourners who attend should be signposted to the advice on social distancing and that they should not attend the
funeral if they are unwell with symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19)
venue managers should ensure that handwashing facilities with soap and hot water and hand sanitiser are available
and clearly signposted
venue managers should ensure that processes are in place to allow a suitable time to clean and disinfect the area in
which the service has taken place both before and after each service, paying attention to frequently touched objects
and surfaces, using regular cleaning products
venue managers should consider how to manage the flow of groups in and out of their venues to minimise overlap
between different groups and allow for adequate cleaning
venue managers should maximise ventilation rates of the premises by opening windows and doors where possible
Local Authorities should ensure funeral arrangements and numbers of attenders are consistent with this guidance.
Social distancing for mourners
Social distancing measures are actions to reduce social interaction between people in order to reduce the transmission of
coronavirus (COVID-19) including:
ensuring that you are at least 2 metres (3 steps) away from others
following the guidance on hand hygiene and preventing the spread of infection:
wash your hands more often than usual, for 20 seconds using soap and water or hand sanitiser, particularly after
coughing, sneezing and blowing your nose, or after being in public areas
when you cough or sneeze, cover your mouth and nose with a tissue, or the crook of your sleeved arm (not your
hands) if you don’t have a tissue, and throw the tissue away immediately. Then wash your hands or use hand
sanitiser
Mourners should also follow the advice on social distancing when travelling to and from the funeral.
Who should attend?
The grieving process and related formal and informal rituals, through which we mourn the passing of loved ones, are
important for the health and wellbeing of the bereaved. Interruption of this process is linked with negative impacts on both
the physical and mental health of the bereaved.
to minimise the risk of transmission only the following should attend, alongside the Funeral Director, Chapel Attendant,
and funeral staff:
members of the person’s household
close family members
or if the above are unable to attend, close friends
attendance of a celebrant of choice, should the bereaved request this
Mourners who are symptomatic
Anyone who is showing symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) (a new continuous cough or a high temperature) should not
attend the funeral due to the risk that they pose to others; remote participation should be considered, for example live
streaming.
Mourners who are self-isolating due to a possible case of coronavirus
(COVID-19) in their household
Key mourners of the deceased person may include those who areself-isolating due to another member of the
household being unwell with symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19). Where the funeral is scheduled before the period
of household isolation has been completed (14 days from the first person in that household showing symptoms) mourners
who are self-isolating should be facilitated to attend.
Mourners who are from a household that is self-isolating should:
not attend if they have any symptoms of any kind, even if these are very mild
maintain a distance of at least 2 metres between themselves and others
advise the other mourners that they are otherwise self-isolating at home, and ensure that they do not attend at the
same time as another mourner who may be extremely clinically vulnerable
practise careful hand and respiratory hygiene:
wash their hands more often - with soap and hot water for at least 20 seconds or using a hand sanitiser.
avoid touching their eyes, nose, and mouth
covering their cough or sneeze with a tissue, then throwing the tissue in a bin
Mourners who are from a household that is self-isolating are advised to use their own transport where possible.
Mourners who are extremely clinically vulnerable
Mourners who are in an extremely clinically vulnerable group should be facilitated to attend, should they wish to do so.
People who are clinically extremely vulnerable should have received a letter telling them they are in this group or been told
by their GP. Mourners who are in an extremely clinically vulnerable group have been advised that they should minimise
their contact with others for their personal protection. However, they may decide to attend a funeral despite the additional
risk this poses to them and should be facilitated to do so.
They are not advised to attend a funeral if there are others attending who are self-isolating due to another member of the
household being unwell with symptoms of coronavirus, as they could be incubating disease. Mourners who are extremely
clinically vulnerable should follow the general social distancing advice for the clinically vulnerable mourners and should
maintain a distance of 2 metres away from others as a minimum.
Actions to reduce their risk of infection could include:
advising other attendees that there is an extremely clinically vulnerable person attending and reiterating the need to
stay at home if they are unwell, and to be respectful of the vulnerable person’s need to avoid close contact at any point
advising the mourner to travel to the venue via the safest route possible, preferably in a car by themselves, or with
someone from their household
considering the additional risk involved if attending the funeral requires travelling by public transport
ensuring that mourners who are in a clinically vulnerable group do not attend the same ceremony as mourners who are
in household isolation
Mourners who are clinically vulnerable or extremely clinically vulnerable should adhere to rigorous hand and respiratory
hygiene at all times but particularly whilst out of the home environment. Hand sanitiser or sanitising wipes should be used
regularly whilst outside of the home.
Personal care of deceased people
Mourners are advised not to take part in rituals or practices that bring them into close contact with the deceased. Where
there are aspects of faith which include close contact with the deceased, that contact should be restricted to those who
are wearing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) under the supervision of someone who is trained in appropriate use of
PPE. Detailed guidance on care of the deceased is availableand should be followed, regardless of the setting in which
personal care of the deceased is provided.
Given the very significant risk for vulnerable and extremely vulnerable people who come into contact with coronavirus
(COVID-19), it is strongly advised that they have no contact with the body of the deceased. This includes washing,
preparing or dressing the body.
Additional measures
Additional measures that allow participation in the funeral service without attendance should be considered, such as:
allowing additional mourners to participate remotely alongside those physically present where possible, for example by
live streaming the service. Priority should be given to mourners who are extremely clinically vulnerable who may wish
to access the service remotely if this service has limited capacity
after the funeral, a deferred celebration or memorial service, which could be considered and held after the social
restrictions are lifted and at a time when attendance and shared mourning can safely take place
Experiencing grief or bereavement
Whenever the loss of a friend or loved one happens, it can be an extremely difficult and challenging time. This is likely to
be even more so for those experiencing bereavement and grief during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.
Bereaved people may struggle with the shock, not just of the bereavement but that the social distancing measures mean
that they cannot say goodbye in the way that they would have wanted. This could be particularly hard for those isolating
alone, and it may be harder to connect with usual support networks.
Those who are bereaved are likely to feel waves of intense emotions as they come to terms with loss. These can include
sadness, guilt, shock and anger. All are common and there is no right or wrong way to feel. Grief affects everyone in
different ways but the important thing is to grieve and to have the right support to do this.
Learn more about grief and support available through:the NHS; Cruse Bereavement Care (offers advice and support on
dealing with bereavement and grief during the coronavirus outbreak); ataloss.org (provides signposting and services
across the UK). If you are supporting a bereaved child or young person the Childhood Bereavement Network has
information and links to national and local organisations.
The Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (England) Regulations 2020
This document is guidance. The law is contained in the Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (England)
Regulations 2020 (referred to as ‘the Regulations’ in this document). The Regulations, permit you to leave your home if
you have a reasonable excuse to do so. By way of an indication of what is a reasonable excuse in the case of funerals,
the regulations set out the following may attend: members of the person’s household, close family members, or, if no-one
in these categories attends then a friend. It is likely that someone of similar importance to the deceased as a close family
member will have a reasonable excuse to attend a funeral. Where the deceased has no close family or household
members to attend, it is important in order to stay safe that only a modest number of friends attend. For the position of
what is lawful, you should refer specifically to the Regulations.
The Regulations can be found here.
Regulation 6, which specifically relates to leaving the place where a person is livingcan be found here.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
