HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 7th of April 2020, 38 new cases of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19
were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand, bringing the
total number of cases to 2,258.
• Of the newly reported cases, three cases were identified in people entering
or returning to Thailand; likely reflecting steps taken to reduce the number
of people entering the country.
• A total of 17 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed
cases (11 from Bangkok). Only seven new cases are reported in individuals
whose work brings them into contact with large numbers of people,
suggesting that restrictions on gatherings may be having some effect.
• 66 of 77 provinces have reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19.
• An additional 3 healthcare workers are included in the newly reported cases, bringing the total number of
healthcare workers infected with COVID-19 to 53. To protect healthcare workers and the healthcare system,
it is essential that everyone complies with measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
UPDATE FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH: Expanding laboratory capacity
• From January-April 2020, a total of 71,860 samples were tested for COVID by RT-PCR by University
Teaching Hospitals and laboratories under the Ministry of Public Health (corresponding information from
private hospitals is not currently available)
• Laboratory capacity will be expanded through a project “One Lab One Province – 24 hour reporting”
• The current aim is to establish capacity to process 10,000 samples/day for Bangkok and surrounding
areas, and 10,000 samples/day for the Provinces.
• The number of certified laboratories (public and private) will be expanded from 80 to110 by end April.
• Web-based reporting will notify the Emergency Operations Centre of laboratory results within 24 hours.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,258 confirmed (38 new)
27 deaths (1 new)
1,407 people hospitalized
53 healthcare staff infected
(3 new)
23 severe cases
824 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 7 April 2020
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
Today is World Health Day and this year’s theme is Support Nurses and Midwives.
Every day, nurses and midwives provide essential care and save lives, as they are doing right here and
right now in the COVID-19 outbreak.
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for essential activities (e.g. medical care, purchase food).
• Always try to maintain a distance of at least 1 metre from all other persons
• Use a surgical mask if you are sick. Do not use N95 masks- they are needed for healthcare workers.
• Wash your hands frequently with soap and water. An alcohol-based hand rub is also effective
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides information / advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
