Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for industry on evaluations of diagnostic
products for coronavirus (COVID-19)
Updated 27 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: evaluation of commercially available diagnostic products
Public Health
England
Public Health England (PHE) has established a capability to evaluate approaches from industry to encourage diagnostic
and other scientific innovation.
This programme, led by a joint team working acrossPHE’s Colindale and Porton Down scientific campuses and regional
networks, will provide a single entry-point for all communication from industry and involves a two-stage rapid evaluation
process, which is as follows.
Contents
Stage 1
Stage 2
Contact
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Stage 1
When we receive a submission of information on a diagnostic test or other product, we will undertake a systematic
evaluation of the information provided to reach a decision on whether to progress to stage 2.
This will be communicated to submitters within 1 week and be based on:
a desk-based evaluation of test performance
whether the product does or does not have the potential to meet an unmet need for patient care and public health or be
taken up by a number of laboratories in the UK that currently have no testing capabilities
We will also consider the supply chain and availability of reagents and equipment together with cost. It is important that we
focus on clinical need.
It will not be possible to reconsider the outcome of our decision unless a fundamentally new test is proposed by the same
company.
Stage 2
For tests that are accepted into the programme following the stage 1 review process, evaluation will proceed through a
testing framework.
This will be communicated through an initial conference call, in which plans for evaluation and timelines will be discussed.
Contact
Approaches from companies with diagnostic products they want to be considered for evaluation should use our dedicated
email address covidtestingtriage@dhsc.gov.uk.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
