Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19 and spreading slurry or milk on land, or
storing slurry: RPS C12
Published 23 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19 and spreading slurry or milk on land, or storing slurry: RPS C12
This COVID-19 regulatory position statement (RPS) only applies if you cannot comply with regulatory requirements for
Contents
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
Conditions you must comply with
Enforcement
When to check back
Contact the Environment Agency
landspreading slurry or milk, or storing slurry, as a result of coronavirus (COVID-19) restrictions.
If you landspread slurry or milk produced on a farm you must normally comply with certain regulatory requirements. These
requirements aim to make sure that you do not apply nutrients to land in a way that:
exceeds the needs of the soil and crop
creates a risk of point source or diffuse pollution to surface water or groundwater
If you comply with the conditions in this COVID-19RPS you can spread slurry or milk on agricultural land, or store slurry,
without meeting normal regulatory requirements.
You must get written agreement from the Environment Agencybefore you use this COVID-19RPS.
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
This COVID-19 RPS only applies if you cannot comply with regulatory requirements for landspreading slurry or milk, or
storing slurry, due to the impacts of coronavirus (COVID-19). For example, if your supply chain is disrupted due to
coronavirus (COVID-19) restrictions.
In these circumstances, and provided you meet the conditions in this COVID-19RPS, we will not expect you to:
meet the full building standard requirements and notification requirements of theSilage, Slurry and Agricultural Fuel Oil
Regulations (SSAFO) to store additional slurry
only spread waste milk on the same area in any 4 week period as required under the
U10 waste exemption
spread in line with your planned farm nutrient management plan required underFarming Rules for Water - Reduction
and Prevention of Agricultural Diffuse Pollution (England) Regulations 2018
This COVID-19 RPS does not apply to any other activity, even if it is under the same legislation. You may still need other
permits, licences or approvals for other activities you carry out, and for activities regulated by other bodies.
Conditions you must comply with
You must keep records that show why you needed to use this COVID-19RPS. For example, records of:
staff absences
contractors being unavailable
supply chain failures for example, uncollected milk or cattle off-movements
You must keep these records for 2 years after this COVID-19RPS has expired, including any extensions to it. You must
make them available to the Environment Agency on request.
You must make sure your activities do not endanger human health or the environment. You must not:
cause a risk of pollution to water, air, soil, plants or animals
cause a nuisance through noise or odours
adversely affect the countryside or places of special interest
Places of special interest include:
Special Areas of Conservation
Special Protection Areas
Ramsar sites
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
National and local nature reserves
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Marine Conservation Zones
National Parks
Contingency plan
You must have a contingency plan to:
minimise the breach of regulatory requirements
minimise the impact and duration of not complying with regulatory requirements
avoid causing pollution
You must make sure that all your staff and contractors are aware of your contingency plan. The plan must include field
inspections to assess the risk of slurry or milk getting into surface water or groundwater.
You must get any approvals you need from other regulatory bodies, such as:
Natural England
Rural Payments Agency
Additional slurry storage
You must normally comply withSSAFO to store slurry. However, we will allow you to not meet the fullSSAFO
requirements for slurry storage provided you store it for:
the minimum period of time necessary
no more than 12 months
You must only consider building additional storage if existing facilities are inadequate. You mustnotify the Environment
Agency if you need additional slurry storage.
If you are building a new facility to store additional slurry you must:
check planning requirements with your local planning authority
contact the Environment Agency before building
agree each location with the Environment Agency
install tanks, liners and slurry bags to manufacturer’s instructions
make sure the base of earth bank lagoons is above the water table – there should be at least 1 metre of clay subsoil
beneath the proposed base
use a trial pit to confirm the depth of the clay layer – the resulting hole must be backfilled and puddled in
use liners where there is doubt about soil permeability – lower grade liners can be used for temporary storage but use
high grade liners in high risk areas
monitor the facility to make sure there are no leaks
locate it at least 10 metres from watercourses and land drains – use temporary trial trenches if you are unsure about the
presence of land drains
locate it at least 50 metres from groundwater sources including private drinking water supplies
decommission it as soon as it is no longer needed
If you are using shared facilities you must:
consider any biosecurity risks
agree management arrangements
agree where responsibility lies
For more information see the:
Environment Agency preventing agricultural pollution in exceptional circumstances guidance
Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Managing Slurry on farms information sheet
CIRIA Livestock manure and silage storage infrastructure for agriculturereport
How to spread slurry or milk
You can only spread milk to land if you hold aU10 waste exemption. This exemption has no cost but you must register it
with the Environment Agency.
You must leave at least 3 weeks between each application of milk to reduce surface sealing and to let the soil recover.
You must only spread slurry or milk on land with low run-off or drainage risk.
You must comply with all the other requirements of theU10 waste exemption and Farming Rules for Water.
If you mix slurry with milk you increase the risk of producing lethal or explosive gases such as methane, carbon dioxide,
ammonia and hydrogen sulphide. For more information see the HSE Managing Slurry on farms information sheet.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Enforcement
A COVID-19 RPS means that the Environment Agency will not normally take enforcement action against you provided:
your activity meets the description set out in this COVID-19RPS
you comply with the conditions set out in this COVID-19RPS
your activity does not, and is not likely to, cause environmental pollution or harm human health
If you operate under this COVID-19 RPS, but think you may no longer be able to comply with its conditions, you must tell
the Environment Agency immediately.
The Environment Agency will monitor how operators use and comply with this COVID-19RPS through its proportionate,
risk-based inspection and monitoring activity.
When to check back
This COVID-19 RPS will be withdrawn on 30 September 2020 unless we extend it. After this date you must comply with
regulatory requirements for spreading milk and slurry to land and storing slurry.
Contact the Environment Agency
You must notify the Environment Agency by email and get written approval before using this COVID-19
RPS. We will
respond by email.
Put this wording in the title of your email:
Agriculture: COVID-19 RPS C12 – for action
Email to: enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
