HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 12th of April 2020, 33 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,551.
• Almost 50% (1,218) have recovered, 1% (38) have died, and
about 53% (1,348) are receiving treatment. The majority of
patients currently in hospitals have mild symptoms.
• Of the newly reported cases, twelve cases were identified in
people returning from outside Thailand.
• To reduce transmission from imported cases, all persons
returning from other countries will be quarantined in state-
arranged venues.
• An additional 7 healthcare workers are included in the newly reported cases, bringing the total number to
93. (3.6% of all cases). To protect healthcare workers and the healthcare system, it is essential that
everyone complies with measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
• A total of 17 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed cases, mainly among family
members. Two of the new cases are reported in individuals who either attended crowded places, or whose
work brings them into contact with large numbers of people.
• 68 of 77 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19. The three provinces with
the highest numbers of cases are Bangkok (1294), Phuket (176) and Nonthaburi (148).
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,551 confirmed (33 new)
38 deaths (3 new)
1,348 people hospitalized
93 healthcare staff infected (7 new)
65 severe cases
1,218 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 12 April 2020
UPDATE ON MEASURES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND:
• The Department of Health Service Support manages 1,040,000 Village Health Volunteers (VHVs)
across the country and an additional 15,000 public health volunteers in Bangkok. VHVs conduct home
visits, provide health education, deliver medicines, and make reports to public health authorities.
• VHVs have been provided with surgical and cloth masks, face shields, biohazard bags, and alcohol gel.
Between 2nd and 26th March, VHVs visited 3.3 million households. Between 27th March and 11th April,
VHVs visited 8 million additional households to support case finding efforts.
KEY MESSAGES FROM THE NEW WHO GUIDANCE ON FACE MASKS IN THE COMMUNITY:
• It is critical that medical masks and respirators be prioritized for health care workers.
• The use of nonmedical masks made of other materials (e.g., cotton fabric) in the community setting
has not been well evaluated. There is no current evidence to make a recommendation for or against
their use in this setting.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health
to support migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand.
Protecting yourself and your loved ones over
Songkran
Dr Panpimol Wipulakorn, Director-General,
Department of Health, Ministry of Public Health has
suggested that to adapt to the current challenges of
COVID-19, celebrations should include physical
distancing.
She has discouraged people from returning to their
home towns to visits their parents and grandparents.
Given that this is such a special time of year in which
children wish to pay respects to their elders, she
suggests the theme of this year’s celebration of
Songkran is “we may be physically separate but
but our hearts are still connected”.
• Greetings and well-wishes should be sent
through online or by telephone.
• For those staying in the same house with
their parents, please practice physical
distancing when paying respects.
• Gifts to parents and grandparents should
be sent though delivery services, not in
person.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
