SPOTLIGHT
• Zero deaths reported today.
• To date, 68 of 77 provinces have reported cases. Bangkok has the
highest number of cases (1,489 +12 from State Quarantine) followed by
Phuket (216) and Nonthaburi (157).
• Nine provinces have never reported cases.
• A total of 29 provinces have not reported new cases in the past 28 days.
UPDATES FROM MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH
Testing
• The ministry’s policy is to increase testing among at-risk/vulnerable
groups in the community. These tests aim for diagnosis and contact
tracing by using RT-PCR.
• The positive rate among PUI (person under investigation) is quite low (mid-January to 6 April = 4.5%).
From 7 April (when the definition of PUI changed) to 30 Apr the rate is 1.9%.
• Mass screening will not be used as it is not cost-effective.
Vaccines
• There is no vaccine available for COVID-19. To reduce the risk from influenza-related illnesses, the MOPH is
encouraging seven at-risk groups to receive seasonal influenza vaccinations for free at public hospitals and
private hospitals under National Health Security Office contract starting from 1st
May 2020.
The seven groups are: pregnant women; children aged 6 months to 2 years; patients with chronic diseases;
persons over 65 years of age; people with disabilities; patients with thalassemia and immune deficiency; obese
patients with a BMI greater than 35.
Risk factors
• Alcohol consumption is among the risk factors for COVID-19.
• A survey among the Thai population in April shows that almost 50% reported they had not been drinking (due to
limited access, reduced income and fear of contracting COVID-19). 33% had reduced the amount of alcohol they
drank and 18% continued to consume alcohol at the same level.
• Road traffic accident deaths in April reduced significantly from 850 in 2019 to 350 in 2020. The study showed that
if 50% of Thai population stop drinking for the whole year, Thailand could save 42 billion THB in healthcare costs,
premature death, property loss and associated factors.
• The survey on smoking behaviour among the working age population during COVID-19 shows that 20% reported
reduced the amount they smoked, while 10% increased the amount they smoked and almost half of reported the
same level of smoking. Those respondents who reported reduce smoking cited loss of income and health reasons.
The reasons respondents cited for smoking are stress from the COVID-19 situation, stress from work and fear of
cigarettes prices rising/cigarettes being hoarded or becoming unavailable
Mental Health
• The Department of Mental Health is focusing on suicide prevention, monitoring the situation and recording all
cases on the national database for suicide.
• Regional Mental Health Offices nationwide are working with local health facilities and MCAAT teams to provide
support to those who need it.
• The Mental Health Hotline (Tel. 1232) is available for counseling.
187
Hospitalized
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND
SITUATION
IN THE PAST
24 HOURS
54
Deaths
(0 new)
103
Health care
staff cases
2,719
Recovered
Confirmed
(6 new)
2,960
30 April 2020 WHO Thailand Situation Report
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
Today saw the launch of the 1422 Hotline for migrant workers, who can call and receive health information
about COVID-19 in 3 languages: Khmer, Lao and Burmese.
The project is a joint initiative of WHO Thailand, the Department of Disease Control and the Ministry of
Public Health. Raks Thai and World Vision are operating this information line to provide culturally and
linguistically appropriate advice to migrant workers from three neighbouring countries of Myanmar, Lao PDR
and Cambodia.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand is in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public Health,
sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health to support
migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English, please visit.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit.
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO, please visit.
USEFUL
LINKS
World Health Organization Country Office for Thailand
4th Fl., Permanent Secretary Bldg.3 Ministry of Public Health,
Nonthaburi Thailand, 11000
Media queries sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
WHOThailand
WHOThailand
@WHOThailand
www.who.int/thailand
For latest updates and resources, please visit:
