HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 1st
of April 2020, 120 new cases of laboratory-confirmed COVID-
19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand, bringing
the total number of cases to 1,771.
• Of the newly reported cases, 13 are related to previously reported
clusters. A significant number of cases are still being identified among
people entering the country, highlighting the need for strict compliance
with quarantine requirements. A total of 38 of the new cases are close
contacts of previously confirmed cases, highlighting the need for
increased adherence with social distancing in all settings. Cases are
also still being reported in individuals whose work brings them into contact with large numbers of people,
suggesting that further restrictions are likely to be considered.
• 60 of 76 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19.
UPDATES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN THAILAND
The Ministry of Public Health is establishing extra capacity for COVID-19 patients and a plan for further
expanding this ‘surge capacity’ is under development.
• The Bangkok municipality currently has more than 1,000 beds available as well as a reserve of 1,000
beds in other locations (such as hotels). It also has a reserve of 300 ventilators identified through a
network of hospitals.
• At the provincial level, there is a reserve of 10,000 beds and 1,000 ventilators.
Measures are also being taken to ensure availability of drugs, medical supplies and equipment
• The Ministry of Public Health has allocated 1.5 million surgical masks (approximately a one-month
supply) for health facilities, including those not under the Ministry.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 1 April 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
total and new cases reported
in the last 24 hours
1,771 confirmed (120 new)
12 deaths (2 new)
1,343 people hospitalized
23 severe cases
416 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 1 April 2020
• The current stock of N95 masks held by the Ministry of Public Health may not be enough to meet
current demand, and due to very high global demand, procurement is a challenge. Urgent research
is being undertaken on the efficiency of UVC irradiation for N95 disinfection and reuse.
• The General Pharmaceutical Organization has procured 240,000 doses of Favipiravir from Japan
(40,000 delivered on 30 Mar, 200,000 to be delivered in April) and 100,000 doses from China, to be
delivered in April
Clinical management guidelines have also been revised. Some key points:
• All laboratory-confirmed patients (with or without symptoms) will all be admitted to hospital for at
least 2-7 days for treatment. Patients who have no symptoms (or whose symptoms resolve) can be
transferred to other assigned places until 14th days of observation is completed.
• After day 14 the patient can be discharged but must practice respiratory hygiene and maintain social
distancing for 1 month.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
On 27 March, WHO Thailand hosted a 90-minute webinar for Thailand
MOPH technical staff and practicing clinicians across the country.
The broadcast was a response to the need for clinicians and hospital
administrators to be informed of cutting-edge strategies to save lives and
reduce transmission.
We were fortunate enough to have as our guest speakers, two physicians
with first-hand experience of a large scale COVID-19 outbreak:
Prof. Bin Cao - chief of pulmonary medicine at Capital Medical University, Beijing on the management
of critically ill COVID-19 patients.
Dr. Liu Zheng – vice president of the Tongji Hospital (TJH) in Wuhan, offering perspectives on staffing,
resource limitations, infection control and triage.
You can watch the broadcast here: https://youtu.be/P8pwnUS_ecM
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
You can - and should - follow these simple steps to protect yourself, your
loved ones and the community safe.
Watch and share this WHO video.
MEDIA
• WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of
the outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to
sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 daily situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-
stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
