Self referral portal
30th April 2020
User guide for essential workers and other eligible persons to book a test
at a regional testing site, mobile testing unit, or via home delivery
Contents
2
Programme context 3
What is the self referral portal and who is eligible for a test? 4
How will self referral work for regional testing sites and mobile testing units? 5
How will self referral work for home testing? 6
How to choose a testing route 7
Regional testing site and mobile testing units: step by step guidance
How to register for a test at a regional testing site or mobile testing unit 13
How to book an appointment at a regional testing site or mobile testing unit 18
Home testing: step by step guidance to order a home test kit 27
The Coronavirus National Testing Programme
The coronavirus pandemic presents a critical national challenge and testing for the virus is a central part of the Government’s response. One of the most challenging things about
coronavirus is the uncertainty. Good-quality testing can help provide us with greater certainty. It’s a big part of how we’re going to defeat this disease.
Our response so far:
As part of the government’s 5-pillar strategy for coronavirus testing, testing essential workers who have coronavirus-like symptoms to see if they currently have the virus has been a
priority, and our aim is that anyone who needs such a test is able to have one.
To support this, we are establishing a nation-wide network of drive-through regional testing and have also recently introduced mobile testing units and home testing. We are
continuously increasing capacity at testing sites and expanding the number of home tests available to enable access to testing for eligible groups of people.
In the last week, a self referral portal has gone live to make the process of registering for and booking a test easier for essential workers.
In the last few days, eligibility criteria for testing has also been expanded to cover a wider range of groups (further information about who can access testing is covered on slide four of
this pack).
Self referral portal:
The self referral portal can be accessed here www.gov.uk/coronavirus. Essential workers and other eligible groups are able to register and book a test for themselves and/ or their
household member(s) if they have coronavirus-like symptoms.
There are three ways to get a test via the self referral portal:
1) Book an appointment at a regional testing site
2) Book an appointment at a mobile testing unit
3) Request a home delivery test
3
What is the self referral portal and who is eligible for a test?
• The self referral portal is a secure portal that allows eligible people to register their details and book a coronavirus test. Eligible people
include:
• All essential workers including NHS and care workers with symptoms
• Anyone over 65 with symptoms
• Anyone with symptoms whose work cannot be done from home
• Anyone with symptoms of coronavirus who lives with those identified above
• Care workers and residents in care homes (with or without symptoms)
• NHS workers and patients without symptoms where there is a clinical need in line with NHS England guidance
• Full details of eligibility can be found on the gov.uk website: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/coronavirus-covid-19-getting-tested.
• Note: those who are asymptomatic, (have no coronavirus symptoms), should not use the self referral portal to book a test
• There are three ways to get a test via the self referral portal:
1. Regional testing site
2. Mobile testing unit
3. Home delivery
• Initially, numbers have been limited for the home delivery route but these have been increased over time and will continue to do so
over the next few weeks.
4
How will self referral work for regional testing sites and mobile
testing units?
1. The individual will click on the link and register either their details (if they have symptoms) or household
member(s) with coronavirus-like symptoms. The individual or household member(s) will be added to a list, and
depending on capacity at regional testing sites and mobile testing units, will be invited to book an appointment for
a test.
2. The individual(s) being tested will receive a text message inviting them to book an appointment. The text
message will contain a link to the appointment booking system and a unique 16 digit code.
3. The individual will click on the text message link and be directed to the appointment booking system where they
will be asked to enter their unique 16 digit code. They will then be able to book a specific appointment for a
coronavirus test at a regional testing site or mobile testing unit.
4. Each individual being booked a test will receive a confirmation of their appointment via text message and email.
These will contain a QR code, which will need to be shown to security at the regional testing site or mobile
testing unit. A QR code will be required per-person being tested, either on a smartphone or on a printed copy of
the email.
The following steps outline how eligible individuals can arrange a coronavirus test at a regional testing site or mobile
testing unit:
How will self referral work for home testing?
The following steps outline how eligible individuals and their household members can arrange for a coronavirus
test(s) to be delivered to their home
1. The individual will click on the link and register their details, via the online self referral portal. These details will be
used to verify the identity of the individual before they order their test(s) for delivery. If the eligible person has
access to their work email they should use this to support with the verification process.
2. The individual will then receive an email with a one-time code. If the email address cannot be verified we will
need them to complete a short verification check through TransUnion. Alternatively, the eligible person can
choose to apply for a test at a drive-through regional testing site.
3. The individual will then be able to request up to five tests for members of their household displaying symptoms of
the coronavirus. Order details should then be reviewed and confirmed.
4. The individual will receive a confirmation of their order by email, as well as details of what to do next. Tracking
details for their delivery will also be provided. Once the individual receives their test kit they should follow the
instructions provided.
6
How to choose a testing route
Process overview for choosing a testing route
Below is an overview of the process that individuals with coronavirus-like symptoms should take in order to choose a
testing route via the self referral portal:
These steps are laid out in the following slides, with accompanying screenshots
3 Once a testing route has been selected, follow the steps to complete registration
1 Enter the self referral portal and check eligibility
2 Confirm who is being tested and choose a testing route
8
1. Enter the self referral portal and check eligibility
1. Go to the self referral portal by entering the following web address into your web browser (do not use Internet Explorer to access):
www.gov.uk/coronavirus
Please read the information
provided on the landing page.
• Only eligible people and their
household member(s) should
proceed to register for
coronavirus testing. For details
of eligibility please go to:
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/coron
avirus-covid-19-getting-tested.
Click the appropriate link
reflecting your eligibility as either
an essential work or other eligible
person. If you are an essential
worker you will be presented with
screenshot C and will click ‘Start
now’ to continue registration. If
you are otherwise eligible you will
be taken to screen D.
C
A
9
Check to see if you or your
household member(s) are eligible
to take a coronavirus test.
Click ‘Ok, I qualify’ to continue to
registration.
B
D
2. Select how you want to take the test
Choose where the individual(s) would like to take the coronavirus test, either at
a testing site, or at home via a home test kit.
Once selected, click ‘Save and continue’.
E
10
If you choose the regional testing site or
mobile testing unit route go to slide 12
If you choose the home testing route go to
slide 27
Regional testing site and mobile testing unit:
step by step guidance
How to register for a test at a regional testing
site or mobile testing unit
Process overview for regional testing site and mobile testing
unit registration
Below is an overview of the process that eligible persons should take in order to register for a coronavirus test via the self
referral portal:
These steps are laid out in the following slides, with accompanying screenshots
1 Register personal details (for the individual being tested)
3 Receive an invitation to book an appointment
2 Verify details and submit registration
14
1. Register personal details (for the individual being tested)
Enter the individual’s first and
last name
Click ‘Save and continue’
Enter the individual’s mobile
number
Click ‘Save and continue’
Use the dropdown to select the
reason why you are getting
tested
Click ‘Save and continue’
A
B
15
C
2. Verify details and submit registration
Check that the information entered for the
individual is correct.
Click ‘Submit application’ when ready to
submit registration.
A confirmation of the individual’s application is shown.
NEXT STEPS:
Look out for a text message with an invitation to book an appointment for testing.
All registrations will be shortlisted for testing and when capacity at regional testing
sites or mobile testing units allows, a text message for appointment booking will be
sent. This could be immediately or in a few days depending on capacity.
D
E
16
• The individual will receive a text message from
UK_Gov to invite them to book a specific
appointment at a regional testing site or mobile
testing unit.
• The individual will click the text message link and
enter their unique 16 digit code to access the
appointment booking system.
.
3. Receive an invitation to book an appointment
17
How to book an appointment at a regional
testing site or mobile testing unit
Process overview for booking an appointment
3 Enter NHS number, if applicable
1 Access the appointment booking portal
5 Choose a regional testing site or mobile testing unit and time to be tested
2 Enter personal details for the individual being tested
4 Add household member(s) to the booking
6 Verify details and submit appointment booking
These steps are laid out in the following slides, with accompanying screenshots
7 Receive appointment confirmation email and text message
Below is an overview of the process that essential workers should take in order to book an appointment for a
coronavirus test at a regional testing site or mobile testing unit:
19
1. Access the appointment booking portal
Read the information on the appointment booking page. Check you understand:
• Who is eligible for a test
• What happens at a regional testing site and mobile testing unit
• The information that you need to complete your appointment booking
Click ‘Start now’ to begin your appointment booking registration
Input your unique 16 digit number.
This can be found on the text
message sent, inviting you to book
an appointment
A
B
20
2. Enter personal details for the individual being tested
Enter the individual’s personal details:
C. Car registration
D. Date of birth
E. Name and gender
F. Email address
G. Mobile number
Click ‘Save and continue’ to progress
through the appointment booking
C
F
E
D
G
21
3. Enter NHS number, if applicable
Enter the individual’s NHS number, if applicable.
Click ‘Save and continue’ to progress through the
appointment booking system.
H
I
22
4. Add household member(s) to the booking
An individual (adult or child aged 5 or
over) with coronavirus symptoms living in
the same household as an eligible person
can be invited for testing.
Check the eligibility for testing before
booking anyone for a test.
If only the eligible person registered needs
a test, proceed to appointment booking by
clicking on ‘Book appointment’
Provide personal details of the
household member(s), information
required:
• Name and gender
• Date of birth
• Email address
• Mobile number
Check the information provided for
household members is correct.
Click ‘Save and continue’ to progress to
the appointment booking.
J
K
23
5. Choose a regional testing site or mobile testing unit and time
to be tested
Enter your post code to find a regional
testing site or mobile testing unit near
you.
Click ‘Find site’
Choose from the list of regional testing
sites and mobile testing units available.
Click ‘See available times’
Select a time for an appointment
Click ‘Save and continue’
L M N
24
6. Verify details and submit appointment booking
Check that the information entered is
correct.
Click ‘Confirm appointment’ when ready to
confirm the appointment.
A confirmation of the individual’s
appointment booking is shown.
NEXT STEPS:
A text message and email will be sent to
each individual confirming the
appointment booking. The email and text
message will contain a QR code which will
need to be shown to security when
entering the regional testing site or
accessing the mobile testing unit. Each
person coming for testing will need to be
able to show their own QR code.
O
25
P
• Individuals who have successfully booked a
specific slot at a regional testing site or mobile
testing unit will receive an email and text
confirmation.
• Individuals will need to bring the QR code, either
on their smartphone or printout of the email, to
their coronavirus test appointment.
• Security will ask to see the QR code at the testing
site gate - a QR code will be required per-
person being tested.
• The QR code will also be scanned and attributed
to the individual’s coronavirus test.
.
7. Receive appointment confirmation email and text
message
26
Home testing: step by step guidance
How to order a home test kit
How to order a home test kit
3 Verify email address
1 Access the home kit ordering portal
5 Provide details for ordering home testing kit(s)
2 Enter personal details
4 Verify your identity (if applicable)
6 Receive order confirmation details
These steps are laid out in the following slides, with accompanying screenshots
Below is an overview of the process that individuals should take in order to request order testing kits for home
delivery:
29
1. Access the home kit ordering portal
Read the information on the home testing booking page:
• Who is eligible for a test, including the guidance for
different age groups
Key information needed to complete the home test kit
ordering process:
• An email address that you can access and check regularly
Click ‘Start now’ to begin the Home Test Kit ordering process
30
A
2. Enter personal details
B
Enter the personal details of the individual (with symptoms of coronavirus) to be tested:
Name
Date of birth
Address where you are self-isolating and want to receive the test kit
Mobile number
Email address
Click ‘Continue’ to progress through the home test booking process
31
3. Verify email address
I
C
Click send code to receive a
one-time email passcode
Locate the one-time password sent to
your chosen email address
D
E
Enter the one-time code and click
'Confirm and continue'
We'll send a confirmation code to Bsmithlonglonglong@email.co.uk
To continue, you must confirm your email address.
Dear Bob Smith
We sent a confirmation code to Bsmithlonglonglong@email.co.uk
Enter the code to continue
32
4. Verify your identity (if applicable)
Click continue to proceed to the
TransUnion Service or choose to book
a drive-through test
If we are not able to confirm your details, we will
need to complete a short verification through
the TransUnion Service.
Alternatively, you can choose to request a test
at a drive-through centre if you do not wish to
complete the identity verification check
If we cannot verify your details, you will still be
able to book a test by choosing the drive-through
test centre option
F
33
G
5. Provide details for ordering home testing kit(s)
H I
Up to 5 kits can be requested for
people in your household who are
showing symptoms of coronavirus
Note the age-related guidance for
administering a test. Home test kits
can only be used on people aged 5
years and older.
Add additional names by clicking the
'add person' button. When all
individual's details have been
included, click continue to view the
order summary Review the order summary, ensuring that
details are correct.
Confirm you agree to the Terms and
Conditions.
Place the order.
Bob Smith
Bsmithlonglonglong@email.co.uk
07771 900 900
34
6. Receive order confirmation details
A confirmation of your order will be
displayed
We will send a confirmation email
including details on next steps
Please take note of the instructions
on the confirmation page.
It is important to carefully read and
follow the detailed instructions
included in the home test kit(s)
when it arrives
35
J
K
