HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 2nd
of April 2020, 104 new cases of laboratory-confirmed COVID-
19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand, bringing
the total number of cases to 1,875.
• Of the newly reported cases, 24 cases were identified in people entering
the country, highlighting the need for strict compliance with quarantine
requirements. The Thai Government has announced that between now
and 15 April, Thailand will take steps to decrease the number of people
entering the country.
• A total of 38 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed cases, highlighting the need for
strict adherence with social distancing in all settings. Cases are also still being reported in individuals whose
work brings them into contact with large numbers of people, suggesting that further social distancing
restrictions may be required.
• 62 of 76 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19. Approximately half of the
cases to date have occurred in Bangkok and half have been detected in other provinces.
Graph courtesy of Ministry of Public Health, Thailand
UPDATES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN THAILAND
• The Government has announced a nationwide curfew beginning Friday April 3rd
. All residents are instructed
to remain inside their homes between the hours of 10pm and 4am.
• The Thai Government requests that everyone wear a cloth mask when outside their home. To date, 43
million pieces of cloth masks have already been distributed.
• The Ministry of Public Health is establishing extra capacity for COVID-19 patients and a plan for further
expanding this ‘surge capacity’ is under development. Bangkok and the municipality currently have more
than 1,000 beds available as well as a reserve of 1,000 beds in other locations (hotels, etc.). It also has a
reserve of 300 ventilators identified through a network of hospitals. At the Provincial level, there is a reserve
of 10,000 beds and 1,000 ventilators.
• Measures are being taken to ensure the availability of drugs, medical supplies and equipment.
• The Ministry of Public Health has allocated 1.5 million surgical masks for health facilities, including those
not under the Ministry. Distribution will be enough to maintain 1 month of stocks.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 2 April 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
total and new cases reported
in the last 24 hours
1,875 confirmed (104 new)
16 deaths (3 new)
1,355 people hospitalized
23 severe cases
505 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 2 April 2020
• The current stock of N95 masks for healthcare workers held by the Ministry of Public Health is not enough
to meet the estimated national demand of 60,000 masks per day. Procurement is a challenge due to very
high global demand. Urgent research is being undertaken on the effectiveness of UVC irradiation for N95
disinfection and reuse.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for
essential activities (e.g. medical care, purchase food).
• Always try to maintain a distance of at least 1.5 meters from
all other persons.
• Wash your hands frequently. An alcohol-based hand rub is
also effective.
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
• Wear a mask when outside your home. Do not use N95
respirators as supplies are limited and they are critically
needed for healthcare workers.
• Cough or sneeze into your elbow or a clean tissue.
• Dispose of tissues immediately and wash your hands.
• Do not shake hands, embrace, share eating utensils or smoking devices with other people.
• Keep all commonly touched surfaces clean. Advice on cleaning practices and the survivability of the SARS-
CoV-2 virus on surfaces & in different settings is available here.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides information and advice to staff of the UN system in
Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
• The Global Health Network - Coronavirus Outbreak Knowledge Hub - a pop-up area on The Global Health
Network serves as a knowledge hub and access to guidance on COVID-19.
(Note: WHO does not take responsibility for content on external websites.)
