Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: guidance on residential care provision
Updated 19 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for residential care, supported living and home care
Public Health
England
Contents
Who this guidance is for
Steps care home providers can take to maintain services
If a member of staff is concerned they have COVID-19
How care homes can minimise the risks of transmission
If a resident has symptoms of COVID-19
Wearing personal protective equipment
Steps the NHS can take to support care homes
Government support
Steps local authorities can take to support care home provision
Who this guidance is for
This guidance sets out key messages to support planning and preparation in the event of an outbreak or widespread
transmission of COVID-19.
It is aimed at local authorities, clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) and registered providers of accommodation for
people who need personal or nursing care. This includes registered residential care and nursing homes for people with
learning disabilities, mental health and/or other disabilities.
Steps care home providers can take to maintain services
Care home providers are advised to work with local authorities to establish plans for mutual aid, including sharing of the
workforce between providers, with local primary and community health services providers, and with deployment of
volunteers where that is safe to do so.
Care home providers are invited to consider ways in which they can contribute to keeping people safe across the local
area, including the following where possible:
use tools to report capacity for bed vacancies (such as theCapacity Tracker or Care Pulse) to support system
resilience
use tools for the secure transfer of information, such as NHSMail, recognising that not all providers currently have
access to NHSMail
increase the use of Skype and other tools for secure virtual conference calls, to ensure advice from GPs, acute care
staff, local Public Health England health protection teams and community health staff can be given
Care home providers will routinely be procuring personal protective equipment (PPE) such as gloves and aprons. In
addition, there will be a free issue of PPE to support adult social care providers to support compliance with the updated
advice. This will be issued from the pandemic influenza stockpile. Arrangements will be put in place for adult social care
providers to access further PPE as necessary.
If a member of staff is concerned they have COVID-19
If a member of staff is concerned they have COVID-19 they should follow theNHS guidance.
If they are advised to self-isolate at home they should follow thePHE guidance.
If advised to self-isolate at home, they should not visit or care for individuals until safe to do so.
How care homes can minimise the risks of transmission
Care home providers should stop all visits to residents from friends and family. Medical staff and delivery couriers can still
visit, but you should leave a hand sanitiser by the entrance and ask them to wash their hands as soon as they enter the
building.
If a resident has symptoms of COVID-19
Care homes are not expected to have dedicated isolation facilities for people living in the home but should implement
isolation precautions when someone in the home displays symptoms of COVID-19 in the same way that they would
operate if an individual had influenza. If isolation is needed, a resident’s own room can be used. Ideally the room should be
a single bedroom with en suite facilities.
All staff will be trained in hand hygiene. Much of the care delivered in care homes will require close personal contact.
Where a resident is showing symptoms of COVID-19, steps should be taken to minimise the risk of transmission through
safe working procedures. Staff should use personal protective equipment (PPE) for activities that bring them into close
personal contact, such as washing and bathing, personal hygiene and contact with bodily fluids. Aprons, gloves and fluid
repellent surgical masks should be used in these situations. If there is a risk of splashing, then eye protection will minimise
risk.
New PPE must be used for each episode of care. It is essential that used PPE is stored securely within disposable rubbish
bags. These bags should be placed into another bag, tied securely and kept separate from other waste within the room.
This should be put aside for at least 72 hours before being disposed of as normal. Care homes have well-established
processes for waste management.
Clean frequently touched surfaces. Personal waste (such as used tissues, continence pads and other items soiled with
bodily fluids) and disposable cleaning cloths can be stored securely within disposable rubbish bags. These bags should be
placed into another bag, tied securely and kept separate from other waste within the room. This should be put aside for at
least 72 hours before being disposed of as normal.
Do not shake dirty laundry before washing. This minimises the possibility of dispersing virus through the air. Wash items
as appropriate in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Dirty laundry that has been in contact with an ill person
can be washed with other people’s items. Items heavily soiled with body fluids, such as vomit or diarrhoea, or items that
cannot be washed, should be disposed of, with the owner’s consent.
Guidance has been published recommendingaction for all members of a household if one person is showing symptoms.
This guidance does not normally apply to care homes because of the ability of care homes to provide isolation precautions
for individuals living in the home.
Care homes can seek additional advice from their local Public Health England health protection teams. Testing of
residents may be organised if care homes have several cases at a time.
Wearing personal protective equipment
If neither the care worker nor the individual receiving care and support is symptomatic, then no personal protective
equipment is required above and beyond normal good hygiene practices.
General interventions may include increased cleaning activity to reduce risk of retention of virus on hard surfaces, and
keeping property properly ventilated by opening windows whenever safe and appropriate.
Steps the NHS can take to support care homes
Clinical commissioning groups, NHS providers and local community services and primary care will be working with and
supporting local authorities and care home providers in the provision of care.
Community service providers are already, or will be, taking steps to:
contact all local care home providers – including those who have residents who fund their own care – and local
authorities, to share plans for local support networks and care provision across the area, including identifying local
capacity
consider how local community health services and primary care providers can support care home provision, agreeing
with local authorities and care home providers how and when this can be triggered, and what the role of the NHS is in
that circumstance. The collaborative approach between care homes, primary care and community health services set
out in the Enhanced Care in Care Homes framework, for example, will enable this
support local authorities in planning around resilience, including plans to share resources locally in an outbreak of
COVID-19. This should include workforce, including the deployment of volunteers where it is safe to do so, and where
indemnity arrangements are in place
consider, in cases where there may be isolated outbreaks within certain providers, how best the NHS can support in
recovery
consider, where possible, what measures may be put in place to support care home providers in maintaining residents’
independence and mobility and prevent or delay deterioration and loss of function
Government support
The government will provide extra resources to tackle COVID-19. This includes a COVID-19 Response Fund, to fund
pressures in the NHS, support local authorities to manage pressures on social care and support vulnerable people, and to
help deal with pressures on other public services. The size of the fund will be reviewed as the situation develops, to
ensure all necessary resources are made available.
As part of the government’s emergency legislation measures, Statutory Sick Pay (SSP) will be paid from day one of
sickness to support those affected by COVID-19. This will be a temporary measure to respond to the outbreak and will
lapse when it is no longer required.
Individuals employed on zero-hour contracts may be entitled to Statutory Sick Pay if their average earnings are at least
£118 per week (calculated over an 8-week period). However, those who are ineligible are able to claim Universal Credit
and/or contributory Employment and Support Allowance depending on their personal circumstances.
The government will also bring forward legislation to allow small- and medium-sized businesses to reclaim SSP paid for
sickness absence due to COVID-19.
See more information about this package of measures
.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Steps local authorities can take to support care home provision
Local authorities, working with their Local Resilience Forums and drawing on their pre-existing plans for pandemic
influenza should:
contact all registered providers in their local authority area and facilitate plans for mutual aid. It is vital that these plans
also include care homes that provide services mainly or solely to people who fund their own care and are not limited
only to providers from whom the local authority directly commissions care. The Care Quality Commission publishes
information about all regulated care services on its online Directory
consider the need to work closely with local community health services and primary care networks to support care
home provision and draw up a plan for how and when this will be triggered. This should include planning with all of the
assets available to the community, including the voluntary, community and social enterprise sector.
take stock of how to maintain viable care home provision during the outbreak of COVID-19, including financial
resilience. The Local Government Association, Association of Directors of Adult Social Services, and the provider
representative bodies will be publishing best practice on financial resilience
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
