Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Directorate General of Health Services
EMR Division
Guidance document on appropriate management of suspect/confirmed cases of COVID-19
1. Introduction: Since its first detection in China, Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has
now spread to over 210 countries/territories, with reports of local transmission happening across
the world. As per WHO (as of 7th
April, 2020), there has been a total of 12,14,466 confirmed cases
and 67,767 deaths due to COVID-19 worldwide.
In India, as on 7th
April, 2020, 4421 confirmed cases and 114 deaths reported from 31States/UTs.
2. Purpose of this document
A series of measures have been taken by both the Central and State Governments to break the chain
of transmission. One among these is to isolate all suspect and confirmed cases of COVID-19.
However, as the number of cases increases, it would be important to appropriately prepare the health
systems and use the existing resources judicially. Available data in India suggests that nearly 70% of
cases affected with COVID-19 either exhibit mild or very mild symptoms. Such cases may not require
admission to COVID-19 blocks/ dedicated COVID-19 hospitals.
It is important to put in place mechanisms for triaging and decisions making for identification of the
appropriate COVID dedicated facility for providing care to COVID-19 patients. The purpose of this
document is to put in place such SOPs to ensure optimal utilization of available resources and thereby
providing appropriate care to all the COVID-19 patients. This will ensure that available hospital beds
capacity is used only for moderate to severe cases of COVID-19. The SOPs specified hereafter also
specify the different types of facilities to be set up for various categories of Covid-19 cases.
3. Types of COVID Dedicated Facilities: There are three types of COVID Dedicated Facilities –
(1) COVID Care Center (CCC):
1.1. The COVID Care Centers shall offer care only for cases that have been clinically assigned as mild
or very mild cases or COVID suspect cases.
1.2. The COVID Care Centers are makeshift facilities. These may be set up in hostels, hotels,
schools, stadiums, lodges etc., both public and private. If need be, existing quarantine
facilities could also be converted into COVID Care Centers. Functional hospitals like
CHCs, etc, which may be handling regular, non-COVID cases should be designated as
COVID Care Centers as a last resort. This is important as essential non COVID Medical
services like those for pregnant women, newborns etc, are to be maintained.
1.3. Wherever a COVID Care Center is designated for admitting both the confirmed and the suspected
cases, these facilities must have separate areas for suspected and confirmed cases with
preferably separate entry and exit. Suspect and confirmed cases must not be allowed
to mix under any circumstances.
1.4. As far as possible, wherever suspect cases are admitted in the COVID Care Center,
preferably individual rooms should be assigned for such cases.
1.5. Every Dedicated COVID Care Centre must necessarily be mapped to one or more Dedicated
COVID Health Centres and at least one Dedicated COVID Hospital for referral purpose (details
All suspect cases (irrespective of severity of their disease) will be tested for COVID-19. Further
management of these cases will depend on their (i) clinical status and (ii) result of COVID-19
testing.
All three types of facilities will be linked to the Surveillance team (IDSP)
All these facilities will follow strict infection prevention and control practices
All the selected facilities must be dedicated for COVID management. Three types of COVID
dedicated facilities are proposed in this document. All 3 types of COVID Dedicated facilities
will have separate ear marked areas for suspect and confirmed cases. Suspect and confirmed
cases should not be allowed to mix under any circumstances.
Guiding principles
given below).
1.6. Every Dedicated COVID Care Centre must also have a dedicated Basic Life Support Ambulance
(BLSA) equipped with sufficient oxygen support on 24x7 basis, for ensuring safe transport of a
case to Dedicated higher facilities if the symptoms progress from mild to moderate or severe.
1.7. The human resource to man these Care Centre facilities may also be drawn from AYUSH
doctors. Training protocols developed by AIIMS is uploaded on MoHFW website.
Ministry of AYUSH has also carried out training sessions. The State AYUSH Secretary/
Director should be involved in this deployment. State wise details of trained AYUSH
doctors has been shared with the States. Their work can be guided by an Allopathic doctor.
(2) Dedicated COVID Health Centre (DCHC):
2.1. The Dedicated COVID Health Centre are hospitals that shall offer care for all cases that have been
clinically assigned as moderate.
2.2. These should either be a full hospital or a separate block in a hospital with preferably separate
entry\exit/zoning.
2.3. Private hospitals may also be designated as COVID Dedicated Health Centres.
2.4. Wherever a Dedicated COVID Health Center is designated for admitting both the confirmed and
the suspect cases with moderate symptoms, these hospitals must have separate areas for
suspect and confirmed cases. Suspect and confirmed cases must not be allowed to
mix under any circumstances.
2.5. These hospitals would have beds with assured Oxygen support.
2.6. Every Dedicated COVID Health Centre must necessarily be mapped to one or more Dedicated
COVID Hospitals.
2.7. Every DCHC must also have a dedicated Basic Life Support Ambulance (BLSA) equipped with
sufficient oxygen support for ensuring safe transport of a case to a Dedicated COVID Hospital if
the symptoms progress from moderate to severe.
(3) Dedicated COVID Hospital (DCH):
3.1. The Dedicated COVID Hospitals are hospitals that shall offer comprehensive care primarily for
those who have been clinically assigned as severe.
3.2. The Dedicated COVID Hospitals should either be a full hospital or a separate block in a hospital
with preferably separate entry\exit.
3.3. Private hospitals may also be designated as COVID Dedicated Hospitals.
3.4. These hospitals would have fully equipped ICUs, Ventilators and beds with assured Oxygen
support.
3.5. These hospitals will have separate areas for suspect and confirmed cases. Suspect and
confirmed cases should not be allowed to mix under any circumstances.
3.6. The Dedicated COVID Hospitals would also be referral centers for the Dedicated COVID Health
Centers and the COVID Care Centers.
All these facilities will follow strict infection prevention and control practices.
4. Management of COVID cases
4.1. Assessment of patients:
In addition to patients arriving directly through helpline/ referral to above categories of COVID
dedicated facilities, in field settings during containment operations, the supervisory medical officer
to assess for severity of the case detected and refer to appropriate facility.
States\UTs may identify hospitals with dedicated and separate space and set up Fever Clinics in
such hospitals. The Fever Clinics may also be set up in CHCs, in rural areas subject to availability
of sufficient space to minimize the risk of cross infections. In urban areas, the civil\general
hospitals, Urban CHCs and Municipal Hospitals may also be designated as Fever Clinics. These
could be set up preferably near the main entrance for triage and referral to appropriate COVID
Dedicated Facility. Wherever space allows, a temporary make shift arrangement outside the
facility may be arranged for this triaging.
The medical officer at the fever clinics could identify suspect cases and refer to COVID Care
Centre, Dedicated COVID Health Centre or Dedicated COVID Hospital, depending on the clinical
severity.
4.2 Categorization of patients
Patients may be categorized into three groups and managed in the respective COVID hospitals
– Dedicated COVID Care Centre, dedicated COVID Health Centre and dedicated COVID
Hospitals.
Group 1: Suspect and confirmed cases clinically assigned as mild and
very mild
Group 2: Suspect and confirmed cases clinically assigned as moderate
Group 3: Suspect and confirmed cases clinically assigned as severe
Group 1: Suspect and confirmed cases clinically assigned as mild and very mild (COVID Care
Centres)
➢ Clinical criteria: Cases presenting with fever and/or upper respiratory tract illness (Influenza
Like Illness, ILI).
➢ These patients will be accommodated in COVID Care Centers.
➢ The patients would be tested for COVID-19 and till such time their results are available they
will remain in the “suspect cases” section of the COVID Care Center preferably in an
individual room.
➢ Those who test positive, will be moved into the “confirmed cases” section of the COVID Care
Center.
➢ If test results are negative, patient will be given symptomatic treatment and be discharged with
advice to follow prescribed medications and preventive health measures as per prescribed
protocols.
➢ If any patient admitted to the COVID Care Center qualifies the clinical criteria for moderate
or severe case, such patient will be shifted to a Dedicated COVID Health Centre or a Dedicated
COVID Hospital.
➢ Apart from medical care the other essential services like food, sanitation, counseling etc. at the
COVID Care Centers will be provided by local administration. Guidelines for quarantine
facilities (available on MoHFW website) may be used for this purpose.
Group 2: Suspect and confirmed cases clinically assigned as moderate (Dedicated COVID
Health Centres)
➢ Clinical criteria: Pneumonia with no signs of severe disease (Respiratory Rate 15 to
30/minute, SpO2 90%-94%).
➢ Such cases will not be referred to COVID Care Centers but instead will be admitted to Dedicated
COVID Health centres.
➢ It will be manned by allopathic doctors and cases will be monitored on above mentioned
clinical parameters for assessing severity as per treatment protocol (available on MoHFW
website).
➢ They will be kept in “suspect cases” section of Dedicated COVID Health Centres, till such
time as their results are not available preferably in an individual room.
➢ Those testing positive shall be shifted to “confirmed cases” section of Dedicated COVID
Health Centre.
➢ Any patient, for whom the test results are negative, will be shifted to a non-COVID hospital
and will be managed according to clinical assessment. Discharge as per clinical assessment.
➢ If any patient admitted to the Dedicated COVID Health Center qualifies the clinical criteria
for severe case, such patient will be shifted to a Dedicated COVID Hospital.
Group 3: Suspect and confirmed cases clinically assigned as severe (Dedicated COVID Hospital)
➢ Clinical criteria: Severe Pneumonia (with respiratory rate ≥30/minute and/or SpO2 < 90% in
room air) or ARDS or Septic shock
➢ Such cases will be directly admitted to a Dedicated COVID Hospital’s ICU till such time as test
results are obtained.
➢ If test results are positive, such patient will remain in COVID-19 ICU and receive treatment as
per standard treatment protocol. Patients testing negative will be managed with adequate
infection prevention and control practices.
Algorithm for isolation of suspect/confirmed cases of COVID-19
Patient to remain
in COVID-19
ICU
Manage according
to clinical
assessment
Discharge as
per clinical
assessment
Manage
according to
clinical
assessment.
Observing all
infection
prevention and
control practices.
Shift to non-
COVID hospital
/block when
patient becomes
stable
Shift to
“Confirmed
case” section
of
DEDICATED
COVID
HEALTH
CENTRE.
Monitor for
clinical
severity
Shift to CDH
if necessary
Shift to non-
COVID
hospital/block
and manage
according to
clinical
assessment.
Discharge as
per clinical
assessment
Shift to
“Confirmed
case” section of
COVID CARE
CENTRE
Monitor
health twice
daily
Shift to
DCHC or
CDH if
necessary
Discharge &
symptomatic
management
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
Test all for COVID-19
Test all for COVID-19
Test all for COVID-19
Admit to
DEDICATED COVID
HOSPITAL
with ICU facility
Admit to “Suspect case”
section of
DEDICATED COVID
HEALTH CENTRE
Admit to “Suspect case”
section of
COVID CARE CENTER
(hotels/lodges/hostels/
stadiums)
Mild and very mild
(Fever/ URTI)
Severe
(Respiratory rate ≥30/minute
SpO2 < 90% in room air)
Moderate
(Pneumonia with no signs of severe
disease)
(RR 15 to 30/minute, SpO2 90%-
94%)
Suspect COVID-19 Case
Screening at Fever Clinics
Suspect cases directly reporting to COVID
dedicated facility.
