IU-o
anszftrnr \
€
o/
w
ffi
eiq+{ q{&
qrqd ifitiDT(
FINeq \d qRqrg iFe[M fuIFI
Errezt Si qRqN ?Felrot darcrq
Government of lndia
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
DO. No. z.2B0I5I 0L 12020-EMR(PI, )
Dated the 20th March, 2O2O
7*
fffr qEFI, oTr$\'\ry
qFds
PREETI SUDAN, ns
Secretary
Dear Colleague,
This is in continuation to my previous communication to you dated 19.3.2020 with
regard to dealing with NCoronavirus/Covid-19.
The Central Government had shared elaborate guidelines on Social Distancing with all
States / UTs on 16.03.2020 (copy enclosed), In compliance, while some of the
States/UTs issued necessary guidelines in this regard, the measures taken by the States
/ UTs are not uniform. Expert Group constituted under this Ministry has emphasised on a
need for uniform implementation of guidelines on social distancing. It is, therefore,
imperative that all the States / UTs take following social distancing measures:
1. Regulate hours and work in government offices to reduce congestion and maintain
hygiene.
2. Regulate working hours in all services except for essential seruices. Industrial
establishments to adopt staggered timings and regulation of crowd in market should
also be resofted to.
3, Private sector to consider work from home, wherever feasible.
4. Educational institutions, theatres, museums, gyms, examination centres, etc. to be
closed.
5. Spofting events, competitions and religious gatherings to be postponed and maintain
required social distancing even in smaller gatherings.
6. Plan decrease in frequency of seruices of metros, railways, buses and airplanes;
alternate seating to ensure social distancing; disinfection and crowd control in places
like railway stations, metro stations, bus stands, airports, etc.
7. All senior citizens [except for public representatives/government seruants/medica]
professionalsl to remain indoors and avoid gatherings, except for medical reasons
and need for essential seruices.
B. All children below 10 years of age to remain at home and avoid going to public
parks, picnics and other games requiring large number of participants.
9. All health establishments to avoid non-urgent hospitalization and minimize elective
surgeries
10. Motivating citizens, pafticularly the Youth, to be volunteers to support the
Governments'ongoing effofts in management of COVID-l9.
ll.Regulate prices of masks, saniti2ers, medicines, etc. and ensure their availability.
12.Sensitize on appropriate use of masks and good hygienic practices including washing
hands with soap.
Room No. 156, A-Wing, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-110 011
Tele : (o) 011-23061863, 23063221, Fax: 011-290612s2, E-mail : secyhfiru@nic.in
_t
State / UT Governments have necessary authority under the Epidemic Diseases Act,
t897, the Disaster Management Act, 2005 and also under various provisions of Cr. PC
and IPC, as has been already conveyed by me vide letter D.O. No. Z.2B0t5lLgl2O2O-
EMR; dated 13th March , 2O2O (copy enclosed).
All State I Ut Governments are requested to implement these directions and if
required, they may consider invoking relevant provisions of law, as warranted in larger
public interest.
To:
1. Chief Secretaries of all States / UTs
Copy to:
1. Principal Secretaries (Health) of all States / UTs
2. All Nodal Officers appointed by the Government of India for COVID-l9 Management
3. Secretaries of all Ministries / Departments of the Government of India
Copy for information to:
1. Principal Secretary to the Hon'ble Prime Minister, South Block, New Delhi.
2. Cabinet Secretary, Rashtrapati Bhawan, New Delhi
3. PS to Hon'ble HFM / PS to Hon'ble MoS (AKC)
4. Sr. PPS to Secretary (H) / Sr. PPS to Secretary (DHR)
)
li*"^
Yours
l4
ffig
ffi qfr, sn{g5
wF{s
PREETI SUDAN, ns
Secretary
qriH rrimT{
HReq \rq qRcnq ?Delrut frrn r
rsr$eq si qRm iRBrM dTroq
Government of India
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
P,Q,No,z'210?Ql L4 I 2020'PH
16-3-2020
Dear Colleagues,
This has reference to my previous communications to you with regard to
dealing with the nCoronavirus/Covid-19 challenge
A number of measures have been taken both by Govt of India and by the
States to contain Covid-19. These include dissemination of Do's & Don'ts, guidelines
on wearing of masks, action on various travel advisories, implementation of
protocols on surveillance, prevention of hospital infection, discharge policy, clinical
management, etc.
Detailed consultation with public health experts have suggested to focus on
social distancing measures as a preventive strategy to prevent and contain
transmission of this disease. It was brought out that implementation of social
distancing measures would have a major impact in limiting the spread and will also
provide us with time to strengthen our response framework.
Accordingly, advisory/guidelines are drawn up for further action. While
implementing these measures, it is impoftant to educate the community so as to
ensure their cooperation and avoid any panic. It is reiterated that these are
preventive measures so as to lessen the impact of COVID-19 in the country and are
temporary.
I take this opportunity to thank you and your team for the tremendous hard
work that you are putting in to keep our country safe.
The advisory is enclosed for fufther action'
k,,_ *?^,.J,"
SuLrt sincerely,
,,*##3h,
Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs
CC to ACS/Pr.Secy.(H)/Secy.(H) of' all States/UTs
Encl.: as above
'erqqq qcd
Room No. 156, A-Wing, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-110 011
Tele : (O) 01 1 -23061 863, 23063221, Fax : 01 1 -23061 252, E:mail : secyhfu@nic.in
f
Advisorv on Social Distancins Measure in view of snread of COVID-I9 disease
Social distancing is a non-pharmaceutical infection prevention and control interuention
implemented to avoid/decrease contact between those who are infected with a disease causing
pathogen and those who are not, so as to stop or slow down the rate and cxtent of diseasc
transmission in a community. This evcntually lcads to dccrcase in spread, morbiclity ancl
mortality due to the disease.
In addition to the proposed interventions, the State/UT Governments may prescribe such other
measures as they consider necessary.
A11 these proposed interventions shall be in force till 3 1't of March, 2020. They will be reviewed
as per the evolving situation.
The following interventions are proposed:
1. Closure of all educational establishments (schools, universities etc), gyms, rluseums,
cultural and social centres, swimming pools and theatres. Students should be advised
to stay at home. Online education to be promoted.
2. Possibility ofpostponing exams may be explored. Ongoing exalns to be conducted only
after ensuring physical distance of one meter amongst stndents.
3. Encourage private sector organizations/employers to allow employees to worl< from
home wherever feasible.
4. Meetings, as f'ar as feasible, shall be done through video conferences. Minimize or
reschedule meetings involving large number of people unless necessary.
5. Restaurants to ensure handwashing protocol and proper cleanliness of frequently
touched surfaces. Ensure physical distancing (minimum lmetre) between tables;
encourage open air seating where practical with adequate distancing.
6. Keep already planned weddings to a limited gathering, postpone all non-essential social
and cultural gatherings.
7 . Local authorities to have a dialogue with organizers of sporting events and competitions
involving large gatherings and they may be advised to postpone such events.
8. Local authorities to have a dialogue with opinion leaders and religious leaclers to
regulate mass gatherings and should ensure no overcrowdinglatleast one metre clistance
between people.
Page 1 of 2
9. Local authorities to have meeting with traders associations and other stakeholders to
regulate hours, exhibit Do's and Don'ts and take up a communication drive in market
places like sabzi mandi, anaj mandi, bus depots, railway stations, post-offices etc.,
where essential services are provided.
10. All commercial activities must keep a distance of one meter between customers.
Measures to reduce peak hour crowding in markets.
11.Non-essential travel should be avoided. Buses, Trains and aeroplanes to maximize
social distancing in public transport besides ensuring regular and proper disinfection of
surfaces.
12.Hospitals to follow necessary protocol related with COVID-19 management as
prescribed and restrict family/friends/children visiting patients in hospitals.
13. Hygiene and physical distancing has to be maintained. Shaking hands and hugging as
a matter of greeting to be avoided.
14. Special protective measures for delivery men/ women working in online ordering
services.
15. Keep communities informed consistently and constantly.
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Page 2 of 2
ffi
rrfrfu lrrt
qrtiT srrrt
Flfsaa \q qRilq iF@Iut furrr
iFtrwzl f'ti qfqrq .o@rq
Government of lndia
Department of Health and Family Welfare
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
D. o. N o. 7.28O1s / L9l2020- E M R
Dated : l-3th March, 2O2O
oTr{qqw
IAS
Dear Colleague,
Let me place on record my appreciation for the great work done by all
the states in limiting the spread of COVID-L9. Without your support it would
not have been possible. Continued and constant vigil is important.
2. As part of our management efforts, there is a need to impose certain
social distancing measures such as quarantine of exposed healthy individuals
who could be potential patients or isolation of those with symptoms. Such
measures require great degree of persuasive communication. The persons to
be quarantined or isolated need to volunteer for such measures in greater
interest of the nation.
3. There might however be cases where, in larger community interest we
may have to issue instructions to non-cooperative individuals. ln this context it
is highlighted that legal provisions to support States in there endeavor to
manage infectious diseases exist. These include Epidemic Act of '1,897, Disaster
Management Act and various other provisions under IPC and Criminal
Procedure Code etc.
4. As states get empowered under the Epidemic Disease Act and other
provisions, in our public narrative and press briefings, we have to make it very
clear that there is no epidemic of COVID-19 in the country. All such actions are
primarily legal empowerment for the preventive action that requires to be
ta ken.
The same may kindly be noted.
a
Chief Secretaries of all States / UTs
Copv to : Addl.CS / Rrl.Sec / Secretary (Health) of all States / urs
Room No. 156, A-Wing, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-110 011
Tele : (O) 011-23061863, 23063221, Fax: 011-23061252, E-mail : secyhfw@nic.in
