Discharge Policy of nCoV Case
Clinical samples of any suspect/probable case* of nCOV will be sent for laboratory confirmation to designated
laboratories. The case will be kept in isolation at health facility till the time of receipt of laboratory results and
given symptomatic treatment as per existing guidelines. If the laboratory results for nCOV are negative, the
discharge of such patients will be governed by his provisional/confirmed diagnosis and it is up to the treating
physician to take a decision. The case shall still be monitored for 14 days after their last contact with a confirmed
2019-nCoV case. In case the laboratory results are positive for nCOV, the case shall be managed as per the
confirmed case management protocol. The case shall be discharged only after evidence of chest radiographic
clearance and viral clearance in respiratory samples after twospecimens test negative for nCOV within a period
of 24 hours.
Case Classification*
Suspect case
A. Patients with severe acute respiratory infection (fever, cough, and requiring admission to hospital), AND with
no other etiology that fully explains the clinical presentation AND at least one of the following:
 a history of travel to or residence in the city of Wuhan, Hubei Province, China in the 14 days prior to
symptom onset, or
 patient is a health care worker who has been working in an environment where severe acute respiratory
infections of unknown etiology are being cared for.
.
B. Patients with any acute respiratory illness AND at least one of the following:
 close contact with a confirmed or probable case of 2019-nCoV in the 14 days prior to illness onset, or
 visiting or working in a live animal market in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China in the 14 days prior to
symptom onset, or
 worked or attended a health care facility in the 14 days prior to onset of symptoms where patients with
hospital-associated 2019-nCov infections have been reported.
Probable case
Suspect Case
Send clinical samples for testing of 2019-nCOV
Sample result negative Sample result positive
The discharge will be governed by his
provisional/confirmed diagnosis and it is up
to the treating physician to take a decision.
He shall be monitored for 14 days after
their last contact with a confirmed
2019-nCoV case
Confirmed cases management
protocol
Discharge after chest radiograph has
cleared and two specimens turn
negative within 24 hours
Probable case: A suspect case for whom testing for 2019-nCoV is inconclusive or for whom testing was
positive on a pan-coronavirus assay.
Confirmed case
A person with laboratory confirmation of 2019-nCoV infection, irrespective of clinical signs and
symptoms.
(Source: WHO: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/global-surveillance-for-human-infection-
with-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov))
