1
Expert Meeting on Control of the Novel Coronavirus Disease Control
Analysis and Recommendations of the Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)
(April 1, 2020)
(Excerpt)
1. Introduction
The Expert Meeting reported on March 26 that there was a "high probability of the expansion of
infections," in light of the increase in infection cases entering from overseas. We updated the situation
analysis based on the latest information and have decided to make recommendations.
2. Analysis of the situation
(1) Situation in Japan (nationwide)
The number of infections is rapidly increasing, primarily in urban areas, with clusters of
infected patients reported one after another in areas such as Tokyo and Osaka. The number of
patients with unidentified route (link) of transmission is also increasing.
The effective reproduction number (the average number of secondary infections produced
by one infection) nationwide exceeded 1 as of March 15, and we must closely monitor the
developments.
The number of infected patients suspected of entering from abroad increased notably from
around March 11, and accounted for nearly 40% around March 22 and 23; however this rate
has recently been falling.
Lately, not only the younger generation, but also middle-aged and older people are
becoming the source of patient clusters.
As a recent trend, we found clusters in hospitals, elderly and welfare facilities, returnees
from graduation trip to overseas, participants in evening meetings, as well as groups of chorus
and dancing.
In Japan, we have not yet seen an explosive spread of infection at the level observed in
other countries. However, clusters of infected patients are reported one after another primarily
in urban areas, and the number of infected patients is increasing rapidly. Under these
circumstances, we are beginning to see areas where the medical service system is becoming
stretched, and the medical service system urgently needs reinforcement. Dysfunction of
medical services may happen even before an explosive spread of infection occurs.
(2) Situation overseas
The infection has spread explosively in Europe and the U.S., and the situation is becoming
more severe globally. These countries are now experiencing circumstances where sufficient
medical service is not available due to collapse of the health care system.
2
3. Current response and its problems (omitted)
4. Recommendations
(1) Regional classifications
(i) Indicators to be considered when deciding on classifications
- The indicators to be considered when assessing the expansion of infections in each
region are as follows. Additionally, information of this infectious disease should be
collected smoothly in real time.
1. Number of newly confirmed patients
2. Number of newly confirmed patients whose link of transmission has not been
identified
3. Number of patients seeking care at outpatient services for returnees and people
in contact with them
4. Item number on the consultation form of the Call Centers for Japanese Returnees
and Potential Contacts
5. Number of PCR and other tests, and positive test rates
- To prepare for the response of local medical service systems, the following information
should be grasped in advance: the number of patients with severe symptoms, the number
of hospitalized patients, the number of hospital beds, the number of mechanical
ventilators, etc., and the state of medical personnel.
- Additionally, when considering the situation in each region, the impact on the medical
service system must be considered as well.
- It is important that we capture the level of urgency medical institutions are facing in
each region based on these indicators, and establish medical service systems to prioritize
patients with severe symptoms.
(ii) Concept of regional classification
- We will use regional classifications that properly represent the state of infection: (1)
Region under alert for spread of infection; (2) Region where infection is confirmed; and
(3) Region with no confirmed infections. The basic concept underlying each regional
classification and the possible responses are as follows. Current findings suggest that
children are contributing very little to the regional spread of infections, but whenever
there are new findings, the response for schools will be reexamined accordingly.
3
1. "Region under alert for spread of infection"
Regions where significant increase is confirmed compared to a week before,
but which has not reached a situation that can be referred to as an explosive surge.
There is also an increasing trend of patients seeking examination. In terms of
medical service system capacity, an urgent situation or risk of such situation is
foreseeable in the near future.
<Possible response>
- Behavior modifications to avoid "places where the three conditions are met
simultaneously" ("3Cs" such as closed spaces, crowded places, and close-contact
settings) must be implemented more thoroughly.
-- Request people to refrain from leaving their residence for a set period of
time
--Avoid participating in gatherings and events attended by 10 or more people
-- Refrain from dining in large groups
-- Issue alerts based on specific examples
- Consider the possibility of temporary closure of all schools in the region as
an option.
2. "Region where infection is confirmed"
A region where the increased number of infected patients remains within a
certain range compared to a week before.
<Possible response>
Carry out low-risk activities while taking thorough measures to avoid the
"3Cs." Refrain from participating in indoor gatherings and events attended by 50
or more people. If signs appear that infection is spreading, consider additional
measures.
3. "Region with no confirmed infections"
Regions where there have been no confirmed case of infection during the last
week.
<Possible response>
Carry out low-risk activities cautiously while taking appropriate measures
against infection. Even in this case, thorough measures to avoid the "3Cs" are
essential.
(2) Need for behavior modification
(i) Thorough efforts to avoid the "3Cs"
- To date, we have been implementing a three-pronged basic strategy, namely; 1)
early detection of and early response to clusters; 2) early patient diagnosis, ensuring
4
intensive care and a medical service system for the severely ill; and 3) the behavior
modification of citizens. Considering the rapid increase in the number of patients
in metropolitan areas, the increasing reports of clusters of infected patients, and the
global pandemic situation, etc., we need to even further strengthen the three-
pronged basic strategy; particularly 3) the behavior modification of citizens.
- Thus, citizens must make the following efforts:
-- Raise the understanding that avoiding the "3Cs" as much as possible does not
only reduce own infection risk, but also stop many people from developing
severe symptoms, and lead to saving lives.
-- Commit thoroughly to avoiding the "3Cs" as much as possible.
-- Avoid visiting restaurant businesses such as bars and night clubs. Avoid going
to karaoke and live houses.
-- Recognize that indoor exercise has a risk of collective infection.
-- Follow basic preventative measures such as washing hands and cough etiquette
more thoroughly than usual.
(ii) What to do when you become a patient
Check and learn in advance how to act when you become a patient and share the
information with your family and people close to you.
(iii) Use ICT effectively
Some Asian countries where infection situation is approaching containment are
actively using personal data, primarily location information from mobile
devices.Taking into account the protection of privacy and the Act on the Protection
of Personal Information, utilizing personal data could be an option in Japan too.
Discussions involving the general public and experts, among others, should be
initiated immediately.
Health management using apps should be promoted as well.
(3) Securing of regional medical service systems
(i) Establish medical service systems to prioritize patients with severe symptoms
Not only the designated medical institutions for infectious disease, but also the
valuable local medical resources, must come together to cooperate and coordinate
with their prefectural government and play their respective part in providing medical
services as a combined force. Patients with mild symptoms should have the option
of staying at a facility as well as being cared for at home.
(ii) Precautions at hospitals and facilities
There are cases where infections have spread from within hospitals and facilities.
5
Everyone involved must remain acutely aware and make all efforts to reduce the risk
of infection including by avoiding "places where the three conditions are met
simultaneously" as well as preparing for the risk of infection inside the hospital. In
particular, medical and welfare facility personnel suspected of infection need to be
tested promptly with PCR and other tests.
(iii) Share awareness with citizens to prepare for collapse of the healthcare system
Fortunately in Japan, "health care collapse" as seen in some countries has not
occurred yet. Considering the severe conditions the medical field is facing overseas,
we need to share awareness with our citizens on how to utilize our limited medical
resources, such as mechanical ventilators, as effectively as possible.
(4) Response expected from the government
To ensure the measures outlined above are taken, every effort must be exerted to provide
economic support, establish a medical service system, and secure human resources, etc.
Strengthening of public health centers and the Cluster Response Team has been still
inadequate to date, and the national government and prefectures must act promptly to rectify
the situation. Additionally, support must be provided to examine the effectiveness and safety
of treatments using existing medications as well as to accelerate the development of new
domestic vaccines.
5. Conclusion
Japan's efforts (the "Japan model"), which focusing on modifying the behavior of citizens and
early detecting and responding to clusters, are attracting attention across the world. In fact, we
believe our response was appropriate for the first wave that originated in China's Hubei Province.
On the other hand, as the global pandemic spreads, clusters of infected patients have appeared
successively in Japan as well, primarily in urban areas, and the infection is spreading rapidly. We
ask the government and municipalities for an even stronger response than ever before.
Moreover, we urge our citizens to avoid places that meet the 3Cs, even though it is not mandated
by law, and to play their roles as members of society to protect themselves and the society as a
whole.
