उ.59250772020/ 0॥0ए0एनड
Gost. af India

Hin, of Health & Family Wellara

Directorate General 9” CCHS

545-4, Nirman Bhawen, New Jel
Dated the pri 2520
OFFICE ORDER

Subject, tension of Validity of CGHS Cand in view af the Garona Virus (COVID-t3}

Infection-

 

In view of Ihe Corona virus Disease(CO¥ID-79} , al cut efforts are made
by che Government lo contain its impact by instituting measures at cormmurily as well
a at individual level.Suidelines. for maintaining sorial alstancing between ndivicuals
have akeady been iscued by the Gevernnrent

 

   

 

Inthe saidt of above guidelines. the undersigned is directed :9 convey that tre validity
of CCHS Cards expiring on 34° March 2020 may be extendec in respect of CGHS
pensioner beneficiaries contributing on annual basis and Central Goverment serving
employees suverannualing on 34.03.2020 . as per the details giver under

 

 

|. In case of CCHS pensioner beneficiaries. who contiibute the subscription 07
annual basis and whose COHS vars ae valid Wl Bis! Mlaieh 2020, the valicity
period may be extended till 3Cth Apri 2020 in the Mata Base, by Adil onal
Directors City’ #IQ {in Seth} 07 the basis of request received ever e-atlIror
such beneficiaries. A pazer prink-o.l may be signed and scanned anoy 0° the
sane shall be sent io the beneficiary oy e-mail, wi a direction bo submit the
relevant documents and subscription before Afth Asrii 2020

T. Srila, if a request is received hy email from soning employees, who
Superannuated on 34.03.2020 and aro act in rece pt of PPO. the CGHS Card
may be converted as sansioner GGHS Gard ard valld ty period extended lo Stka
ApAl 2020. A paper erivt-out ray be signed and svanned copy of the serie
‘hall be sont to tha bonafisinry by e mall with a alrection to eusmit the relevant
documents and subsenpiion telore 40lh Apa! 2020. sade oral Linwcien Citys HO
(n Delhi will verfy the date of supe-annvation trom CIS daizbase befere
Prosnssirg the reqy.nst. Ifa Gout Servant superannuating an $°.03.20 was nat a
mamber of CCHS during sovvico thon ho will havo to submit a proat of
superannuation,

li, The peed of extansian wil be incl
decositing the subscriotion.

   

 

 

 

   

 

   

 

 

d wher the care valully is regularised on

Wer
Te

ries in view of

 

‘Trat those relaxations are being made to help tie UGH benef

 

डा वीक condone duo Gow T8 andl rote ced sea precederen
fue

Se

a

(Or. Sanjay Jain;
Director, CGHS

ADYHO}! Addl ODG{HO}, GGHS ‘All Aukilional Directors, COHS CitestZcres
ASDIMCIS

Copy for information to

Aewvisor. COHS. Hlol Pe
FPS to 858 DG. CGHS, MoH
PPS to ISIAS), MoHFY
Under Secretary (EHS),
PS lp Director, CGMS.

Shri B Bhattacharya by email seegenct

 

fone

 

 
