N E W S
45 new COVID-19 cases, three recoveries confirmed in the UAE
23 Mar, 2020: The UAE Government has announced 45 new cases of COVID-19.
The announcement was made during a regular media briefing held today by Dr. Farida Al Hosani, official spokesperson of
the UAE health sector. She elaborated on the precautionary measures taken to prevent the spread of the virus.
Dr. Al Hosani said that one of the declared cases is a person who returned from abroad but did not quarantine himself and
wait for the test results. This resulted in the transmission of the virus to 17 people who came in contact with him, such as
family members, relatives, and coworkers, bringing the total number of diagnosed cases in the country to 198.
Dr. Al Hosani added that the individuals who tested positive belonged to various nationalities, including one each from the
Philippines, Iraq, Tunisia, Syria, Kuwait, Italy, Peru, Ethiopia, Lebanon, Somalia, the UK, Sudan, Egypt, Ireland, Russia,
Montenegro, France, and Poland, in addition to two from Canada, three from Bangladesh, four each from Pakistan and the
US, and seven from both the UAE and India. All individuals in question are stable and are being treated, she added.
During the briefing, it was announced that three more people--two Nepalese and one Iranian--fully recovered from the
disease after receiving the necessary healthcare. The total number of recovered cases now stands at 41. The briefing also
detailed the various preventive measures taken so far, such as the closure of malls (except grocery stores and
pharmacies), the suspension of flights, and restrictions on restaurants.
Al Hosani called upon the general public to maintain calm and patience and refrain from circulating rumours, pointing to
the Attorney General's recent statement regarding enforcement of the law for violators. She also stressed the importance
of adhering to the preventive measures issued by the relevant health authorities in the country.
Al Hosani concluded: ''The protection of our homeland, families, and people is the responsibility that our leadership has
placed upon our shoulders. Our compliance with preventive health measures contributes directly to efforts aimed at
overcoming this challenge. Today, there is no time for courtesy at the expense of the health of our families and
community.''
"Estijaba" service at the operation center –
Department of Health at: 800-1717
|
Ministry of Health & Prevention at:800-11111
|
Dubai Health Authority at:800-
342
}
Privacy
Policy
Terms &
Conditions
© 2020 Department of Health Abu Dhabi. All rights reserved.
