Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Protecting groundwater when developing or
expanding cemeteries during coronavirus
Published 1 May 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Protecting groundwater when developing or expanding cemeteries during coronavirus
Contents
Environmental risks from increased burials
When you do not need an environmental permit
When you will need an environmental permit
Minimum groundwater protection requirements
Groundwater risk assessment
When you do not need a site specific risk assessment
Dealing with the exceptional circumstances of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic presents us all with a huge
challenge. Protecting and improving the environment is still, however, the Environment Agency’s primary aim.
This guidance is for local authorities or other cemetery operators. It covers proposals for the following during the
coronavirus pandemic:
developing new cemeteries
expanding existing cemeteries
Expanding an existing cemetery means significantly increasing burial rates at an existing site, or extending the
geographical area of a site, or both.
Environmental risks from increased burials
Like all developers and operators, those involved with cemeteries have a legal responsibility not to cause environmental
pollution. If this happens, the Environment Agency will take appropriate action.
There is the potential for groundwater pollution caused by:
large numbers of burials in a short time
the cumulative effects of many burials over a longer period of time
If a large number of burials take place over a short period of time, the risk of groundwater pollution is generally higher.
If steps are not taken to mitigate these risks, increases in burials can present a risk to the environment. This is especially
so in areas where the groundwater is either:
vulnerable to pollution
used locally as a source of drinking water
The Environment Agency encourages cemetery developers and operators to propose developments inlow risk
groundwater areas (wherever possible).
They should avoid development proposals that are a high risk to the environment. This follows published positions in
The
Environment Agency’s approach to groundwater protection (Section L. Cemetery developments).
High risk cemeteries include proposed developments in aSource Protection Zone 1 (SPZ1), or 250m from a well, borehole
or spring used to supply water for human consumption, whichever is the greater distance
To avoid groundwater pollution during the coronavirus pandemic, local authorities and other cemetery operators should
also follow the Environment Agency’s:
minimum groundwater protection requirements for all burial sites
advice and recommendations from any site specificgroundwater risk assessments carried out on their behalf by the
Environment Agency
When you do not need an environmental permit
During the coronavirus pandemic, local authorities or other cemetery operators do not need to apply for an environmental
permit (under the Environmental Permitting (England & Wales) Regulations 2016) for:
any proposed new cemetery development
the expansion of an existing site
After the pandemic has ended, you will not need a permit if your site is either:
in a low risk groundwater area
not a high risk development and an Environment Agency agreed risk assessment shows you do not need active
mitigation measures or burial controls at your site
Active mitigation measures to prevent pollution to the environment could include, for example:
High risk developments
If you cannot comply with this guidance
Contact the Environment Agency
ongoing groundwater monitoring
active groundwater drainage controls to facilitate burials
When you will need an environmental permit
After the pandemic has ended, you will need to apply for an environmental permit for your cemetery if either of these
apply:
it presents a high risk to the environment
your site needs active mitigation measures or burial controls to protect the environment
Minimum groundwater protection requirements
The minimum groundwater protection requirements for all burial sites are as follows.
Requirement 1
No human burials should take place within:
a groundwater SPZ1
10m of the nearest land drain
30m from the nearest watercourse (which includes ditches and open land drains which may run dry for part of the year)
or any other surface water
50m of any well, spring or borehole, irrespective of its current use
250m of any well, spring or borehole where the water is intended for human consumption or used in food production
areas identified as having karstic groundwater flow characteristics (following the groundwater risk assessment)
Requirement 2
No human burials should take place on land which is liable to flooding.
Requirement 3
The base of each grave should be at least 1m above the highest predicted annual groundwater level.
Requirement 4
There should be no standing water in graves when dug.
Requirement 5
Graves should not be dug in unaltered or unweathered bedrock. This is solid rock which can be buried or exposed at the
earth’s surface, and which has not been altered by physical or chemical reactions (or both), such as exposure to the
weather.
Groundwater risk assessment
During the coronavirus pandemic, the Environment Agency will, where requested:
carry out groundwater risk assessments for local authorities and other cemetery operators proposing to develop new or
expanded cemeteries
provide advice and recommendations to protect the water environment, and particularly groundwater, using the results
of these risk assessments
Local authority or other cemetery operators should contact the Environment Agency’snational customer contact centre to
request a groundwater risk assessment. They will direct your request to your Environment Agency area groundwater and
contaminated land team. These groundwater risk assessments will provide you with site specific advice about your
proposal to develop a new cemetery or expand an existing one.
Groundwater risk assessments will be entirely desk based, and will not require any site visits from our operational staff.
To complete the groundwater risk assessment on your behalf, the Environment Agency may ask you for site specific
information in line with the procedures set out in Cemeteries and burials: groundwater risk assessments.
The Environment Agency uses a risk-based approach when carrying out groundwater risk assessments. The risk for each
site will depend on a number of factors, including:
vulnerability and sensitivity of the underlying groundwater
depth to the water table
proximity of groundwater abstractions, particularly those used for drinking water or food production purposes
proximity to watercourses and wetland habitats
aquifer type and local hydrogeological conditions
number and density of burials
burial techniques employed
When you do not need a site specific risk assessment
You can ask us to carry out a groundwater risk assessment for any proposed development. But, for low risk groundwater
areas you do not need an Environment Agency site specific risk assessment.
Low risk groundwater areas are defined as follows. The proposed development site is on any one of these:
a principal aquifer and not within a groundwaterSPZ2 and the burial rate is less than 30 burials per annum
a secondary A aquifer and the burial rate is less than 50 burials per annum
a secondary B aquifer and the burial rate is less than 100 burials per annum
unproductive strata
These aquifer types, and the term unproductive strata, are explained in the guidanceProtect groundwater and prevent
groundwater pollution.
You also do not need an Environment Agency site specific groundwater risk assessment for your proposed development if
all burials on site are of human ashes from crematoria.
You can view the Environment Agency’sSPZ and Aquifer Designation areas onMagicMap.
High risk developments
Carrying out the risk assessment will allow the Environment Agency to assess the suitability of a cemetery proposal from a
groundwater protection perspective.
If we consider the development presents a high risk of pollution to groundwater then we will advise you to avoid carrying
out such developments as far as possible.
High risk developments are those that present a significant risk of pollution to groundwater and need active mitigation
measures to reduce that risk.
You may still proceed with a high risk development provided you do both of the following:
have a groundwater risk assessment agreed with the Environment Agency
can comply with any site specific requirements from the risk assessment that are needed to protect the environment
You will need to apply for an environmental permit once the coronavirus pandemic has ended.
If you cannot comply with this guidance
If you cannot comply with this guidance the Environment Agency may take appropriate enforcement action against you if
you cause, are likely to cause, or knowingly permit groundwater pollution.
This guidance will be withdrawn on 31 October 2020 unless we extend it.
Contact the Environment Agency
General enquiries
National Customer Contact Centre
PO Box 544
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
The UK has left the EU
Transition period: get ready for 2021
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Rotherham
S60 1BY
Email
enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk
Telephone
03708 506 506
Telephone from outside the UK (Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm GMT)
+44 (0) 114 282 5312
Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm.
Due to the impact of COVID-19 on our teams you may experience some delays in responses as most of our staff will be working from
home. The best way to contact us is by email (enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk) rather than the postal address.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
