Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: management of exposed healthcare
workers and patients in hospital settings
Published 4 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: management of exposed healthcare workers and patients in hospital settings
Public Health
England
Healthcare workers (HCWs) are vital for the functioning of the health system to ensure that we can treat patients
appropriately. In addition, managers have a high level of skill in assessing whether individual staff are developing
symptoms that would require exclusion from work. HCWs themselves are educated about prevention of the nosocomial
spread of disease. It is a well-established practice for individuals not to come to work with respiratory tract infections.
1. Staff exposures
Contents
1. Staff exposures
2. Staff return to work criteria
3. Patient exposures
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
HCWs who come into contact with a COVID-19 patient or a patient suspected of having COVID-19 while not wearing
personal protective equipment (PPE) can remain at work. This is because in most instances this will be a short-lived
exposure, unlike exposure in a household setting that is ongoing.
HCWs should:
not attend work if they develop symptoms while at home (off-duty), and notify their line manager immediately
self-isolate and immediately inform their line manager if symptoms develop while at work
If the HCW’s symptoms do not get better after 7 days, or their condition gets worse, they should speak to their
occupational health department or use the NHS 111 online coronavirus service. If they do not have internet access, call
NHS 111. For a medical emergency dial 999.
The current recommended PPE that must be worn when caring for COVID-19 patients is described in theinfection
prevention and control guidance.
These are guiding principles and there may need to be an individual risk assessment based on staff circumstances, for
example for those who are immunocompromised.
2. Staff return to work criteria
Symptomatic staff can return to work:
on day 8 after the onset of symptoms if clinical improvement has occurred and they have been afebrile (not feverish) for
2 days
if a cough is the only persistent symptom on day 8, they can return to work (post-viral cough is known to persist for
several weeks in some cases)
3. Patient exposures
In-patients who are known to have been exposed to a confirmed COVID-19 patient should be isolated or cohorted until
their hospital admission ends, or until 14 days after last exposure.
If symptoms or signs consistent with COVID-19 occur in the 14 days after exposure then relevant diagnostic tests,
including the COVID-19 test, should be performed.
On discharge, patients should be given written advice to stay at home and referred to the
stay at home guidance if less
than 14 days has elapsed since their exposure.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
