Revised on 25-01-2020
Novel coronavirus outbreak in China
Travel advisory to travelers visiting China
An infection with a novel coronavirus has been reported from China. As 25th
January 2020, a total of
1287 cases and 41 deaths were reported in 29 provinces (districts and cities) of China. In addition, 28
cases have been confirmed outside Chinese mainland: 5 cases in Hong Kong, 2 cases in Macao, 3 cases in
Taiwan, 4 cases in Thailand (2 cases cured), 2 cases in Japan (1 case cured), 2 cases in South Korea, 2
cases in the United States, 2 cases in Vietnam, 3 cases in Singapore, 1 case in Nepal and 2 cases in
France.
The clinical signs and symptoms are mainly fever with a few patients having difficulty in breathing.
Mode of transmission is unclear but available evidence points to human-to-human transmission occurring
between close contacts through respiratory route.
In view of the spurt of cases being reported from China and travel related cases appearing in many
countries, the travelers to China are advised the following:
 Those planning a visit to China
o All non-essential travel to China to be avoided.
 Travelers to China should follow simple public health measures at all times as under:
o Observe good personal hygiene.
o Practice frequent hand washing with soap.
o Follow respiratory etiquettes - cover your mouth when coughing or sneezing.
o Avoid close contact with people who are unwell or showing symptoms of illness, such as
cough, runny nose etc.
o Avoid contact with live animals and consumption of raw/undercooked meats.
o Avoid travel to farms, live animal markets or where animals are slaughtered.
o Wear a mask if you have respiratory symptoms such as cough or runny nose.
 All travelers to China to monitor their health closely
 During your stay in China, if you feel sick and have fever and cough:
o Cover your mouth while coughing or sneezing.
o Don’t plan any further travel, if sick.
o Seek medical attention promptly.
o Report to Indian Embassy in China ( +8618612083629 and +8618612083617)
 If you feel sick on flight, while traveling back to India:
o Inform the airlines crew about illness.
o Seek mask and the self-reporting format from the airline crew.
o Avoid close contact with family members or fellow travelers.
o Follow the directions of airline crew while disembarking.
o Immediately report facts to the Airport Health Office/Immigration Office and Helpline
number (011-23978046) also.
o Follow the direction of the airport health officer or as issued by the helpline.
 If you feel sick within a span of one month after return from China:
o Immediately call the Helpline number (011-23978046) and follow the direction issued.
o Maintain effective self-isolation at home and with others.
o Observe good personal hygiene.
o Practice frequent hand washing with soap.
o Follow respiratory etiquettes - cover your mouth when coughing or sneezing.
o Report the illness to the nearest health facility and also inform the treating doctor regarding
your travel history.
