Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Testing for coronavirus: privacy information
Published 17 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Coronavirus (COVID-19) testing: privacy information
Department
of Health &
Social Care
Contents
Introduction
Data Controller
What personal data we collect
How we use your information in the testing programme
Purposes your information will be used for
Data Processors and other recipients of your data
Your information used for other purposes
Legal basis
Introduction
You have been invited to undertake a coronavirus priority virus test because you or someone in your household is a critical
worker and is currently following government guidelines on self-isolation.
The test will confirm whether you currently have coronavirus. This is so that you can:
take the right steps to take to look after yourself
protect others
know if you’re fit and well to return to your critical role
potentially reduce the amount of time you have to self-isolate for
There are different types of test you can be invited for.
You may be sent additional instructions about the site that you are visiting. NHS staff may be invited to an NHS site such
as a hospital, where facilities are available.
Tests are completely voluntary, and you do not have to take it. If you do decide to take a test, then you need to follow the
instructions provided by your employer, upon registering for a home test, or a test at a regional test site.
Once you have taken the test, your sample will be analysed in a laboratory, and you will be informed of the result (positive,
negative or inconclusive) by text and/or email. You will be given advice on any next steps that need to be taken following
your result.
If you are resident in England, your test result will also be sent to a central database, along with other information relating
to coronavirus, to enable organisations to respond to coronavirus.
This database is held by NHSX and controlled by NHS England (on behalf of all UK countries). All information in this
database is held securely, and access to this information is tightly governed, in line with Data Protection requirements.
For residents in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, your health bodies or national government may request NHS
Digital to collate test results for your country, so they can be sent to the relevant public health body in your country to aid
their response to coronavirus.
NHS Digital cannot undertake this collection until requested by the relevant health body or national government.
Data Controller
The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) has commissioned the virus testing programme on behalf of the UK
and will be Data Controller for the purposes of Data Protection legislation. They decide what information is required and
how it needs to be used.
At different points in the process, other organisations may also have Data Controller status, depending on what they are
doing with your information.
Other organisations will also carry out parts of the virus testing programme on behalf ofDHSC but can only act on
instructions provided to them by DHSC. These organisations are known as Data Processors. An example of such an
organisation is Amazon, who will support the actions involved with delivering test kits.
Each organisation will require a different level of information about you, but all will use the minimum necessary to do what
they are required to by the Data Controller.
See the fulllist of Data Controllers and Data Processors.
What personal data we collect
Currently, your employer will contact you, inviting you to take a test to see if you currently have coronavirus. The test is
voluntary, and you do not have to take it.
As the programme develops, we will be looking towards people self-referring for tests, rather than being identified by their
Your rights under Data Protection Act 2018 and GDPR
Retention and storage of your information
Data Protection Officer
List of Data Controllers and Data Processors for the testing programme
Patients living in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland
employer as suitable for testing.
If you decide to take a test, then you need to follow the instructions your employer has given you. You will either register
for a home test or register to attend an appointment at a regional test site.
The details we may need from you are:
first and last name
date of birth
sex
mobile phone number
email address
address (including postcode)
vehicle registration number (if you are taking a test at a regional test site)
NHS Number (for English residents and if you know it – Wales/Scotland/NI residents may need to provide a different
local identifier, which will be specified upon registering for a test)
National Insurance (NINO) Number
other household members’ first and last names (as they may also be invited to test if they show signs of coronavirus;
you can input up to 5 people)
The different testing methods will require different personal data. For example, when registering for a home test, you will
not be required to provide your vehicle registration number.
How we use your information in the testing programme
There are currently 3 home test kit suppliers:
Randox
Thermofisher
Medical Wire
The process may vary slightly depending on which test kit you receive.
Randox operates an end-to-end process. This means once the kit is requested and delivered by Amazon, the completed
sample is returned to Randox. Randox then tests it, records the result and sends your result to you by email and/or text.
You must register your personal information on the Randox website in order to receive your result.
The lab will also send your result to the National Pathology Exchange (
NPEX), who collate all results and send to them to
relevant organisations to help us respond to coronavirus.
Find out more aboutData Processors and other recipients of your data
.
For Thermofisher and Medical Wire test kits, the samples are returned to a government lab. Thermofisher and Medical
Wire receive no information about you.
If you have registered for a home test, then your name and address will be passed to Amazon, who will deliver the testing
kit. The kit will have a unique reference number, and once you have self-administered the test, you will need to follow the
instructions on the kit.
If you have registered for an appointment at the regional test centre, your details will be captured in a database, and
passed to the team running the site, so they can check who you are on arrival.
Once you have ‘checked-in’ and your ID has been validated, you will take the test, and the unique reference number on
the kit will be logged.
The laboratory will receive the sample, analyse it and provide your test result toNPEX.
NPEX will inform NHS Business Services Authority who will send your result to you by text and/or email, along with
supporting information and next steps you need to take.
The lab does not receive any of your personal data, just the kit’s unique reference number, to which they add the test
result, and return to the supplier.
For tests that are not conducted by Randox, the results will go direct to NHS Business Services Authority, who will send
the result to you by text and/or email, along with supporting information and next steps.
Purposes your information will be used for
DHSC is the Data Controller for the following purposes:
confirming the appointment to the regional test site
performing a security and ID verification at the regional test site
receiving and processing your test
returning your results to you
sharing your results with Welsh/Scottish/NI health bodies (if you live in that country) to inform local planning and
responses to coronavirus
sharing results with Public Health England (if you live in England) to help plan and respond to coronavirus
for patients resident in England, instructing NHS Digital to link your test result to your GP record, and to analyse data in
relation to coronavirus.
undertaking quality assurance of the testing process, for example clinical process assurance
analysis to support operational decisions to improve the full end-to-end testing process
day to day use, for example whether someone attended their appointment
to inform regional test sites of improvements to the testing process, for example to manage capacity or throughput
support end to end logistics planning
For English resident patients, your test result will be linked to your GP record. This will be done by NHS Digital, who will
be acting jointly as Data Controllers with DHSC. This will enable your GP to be informed of your test result without you
needing to do anything.
Data Processors and other recipients of your data
Organisations who use your data and information on behalf of a Data Controller can only do so with clear instructions from
them. They cannot use your data and information for any other purpose.
Any use of information that is not covered by the instructions from the Data Controller would be unlawful, unless the Data
Controller agrees and provides written permission to do this.
DHSC have appointed Data Processors, as indicated below, to carry out these activities:
registration of your test
delivery of your testing kit – the Data Processor is Amazon
to schedule appointments and capture information at the point of testing
certify your identity at the regional test site – this may include various organisations who run the different parts of the
regional test site
link your personal details (provided on registering for the test) to the test result (the Data Processor is the National
Pathology Exchange (NPEX, hosted by Calderdale and Huddersfield NHS Trust)
send you your test results via email (if you have taken a Randox home test only - the Data Processor is Randox)
forward your test results, email address and phone number to NHS Business Services Authority (
NHS BSA) to send
you your test results (the Data Processor is NPEX). NHS BSA will provide results to all UK residents
receive data to enable your results, and supporting information, to be communicated back to you by text and email (the
Data Processor is NHS BSA)
Services on behalf of DHSC may be provided by different organisations in different regions.
Your information used for other purposes
Your information may also be used for different purposes that are not directly related to your health and care. These
include:
research into coronavirus (including potentially being invited to be part of clinical trials)
planning of services or actions in response to coronavirus
monitoring the progress and development of coronavirus
Information provided by you, and collected about you, in relation to testing for coronavirus will not be used for any purpose
that is not linked to coronavirus.
Wherever possible, information that does not directly identify you will be used for these purposes, but there may be times
when it is necessary for your personal data to be used.
Any releases of information that identify you will be lawful and the minimum necessary for that purpose.
NHS Digital is required, under law, byDHSC and NHS England, to collect, analyse and share information and data
relating to coronavirus, when this information is requested by other health and care organisations or researchers.
This information may be collected from various health and care organisations and may be given to other health and care
organisations responding to coronavirus.
Legal basis
DHSC’s legal basis for processing your personal data is:
GDPR Article 6(1)(e) – the processing is necessary for the performance of its official tasks carried out in the public
interest in providing and managing a health service
GDPR Article 9(2)(h) – the processing is necessary for medical diagnosis, the provision of health treatment and
management of a health and social care system
Data Protection Act 2018 – Schedule 1, Part 1, (2) (2) (f) – Health or social care purposes
Other organisations involved in processing your data will be doing so either with an agreement in place with
DHSC to
provide that service, or with a legal basis of their own (such as NHS Digital).
Your rights under Data Protection Act 2018 and GDPR
By law, you have a number of rights as a data subject, such as the right to access information held about you.
This testing programme does not take away or reduce these rights, so you can still request (for example), from the
organisations named in this notice, copies of the information they hold about you.
If you are unhappy or wish to complain about how your information is used as part of this programme, you should contact
DHSC or relevant organisation in the first instance to resolve your issue.
So, for example, if you have a complaint relating to Randox home tests, you would contact Randox initially.
If you are still not satisfied, you can complain to theInformation Commissioners Office.
Retention and storage of your information
For English residents, your information will be stored in line with theRecords Management Code of Practice for Health
and Social Care 2016. This means we will keep your information for up to 8 years before we dispose of it.
If you live in Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland, there iscountry-specific information on retention of records.
Information that identifies you will be stored securely, and processed in, the UK.
Information that does not, and cannot, identify you may be stored and processed outside of the UK. For example,
information purely about the number of tests conducted, or the number of outcomes from tests.
Data Protection Officer
The Data Protection Officer for DHSC is John Ryder.
Email: data.protection@dhsc.gov.uk
List of Data Controllers and Data Processors for the testing programme
Data Controllers
DHSC
NHS England
NHS Digital, jointly with DHSC for information relating to English resident patients. NHS National Services Scotland,
Public Health Wales and NI public health bodies, may also request NHS Digital to process information relating to their
resident population for coronavirus
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Public Health England, when they receive results and use them to plan their response to coronavirus
Data Processors
Deloitte, who operate some of the regional test sites
Serco, who manage some of the regional test sites once established
Barcode Warehouse, who provide barcodes for test kits
Amazon, to deliver test kits once a request has been registered
Randox, to supply home tests and inform you of the result of your Randox home test. They also operate some regional
test sites
Thermofisher, to supply home tests and operate some regional test sites
Medical Wire, to supply home tests and operate some regional test sites
ServerLabs, for building the digital solution for the testing programme
Teleperformance. providing call centre assistance across the coronavirus digital service
ACF Technologies, providing software to enable you to book a test at a regional test site
Jigsaw24, who are providing mobile phone and SIMs for the mobile regional test site apps – so you don’t have to self-
scan a barcode at the regional test site)
NPEX, who collate all coronavirus results from testing laboratories, and pass the results onto other organisations, to
enable them to do what they need to
NHS Business Services Authority, to inform you of the result of your regional test site test, provide supporting
information to you, and to send your test result into a central database to help respond to coronavirus
Each organisation that processes your information must provide you with information about how they do this. This should
be publicly available on their website or can be requested from them.
For example, if you want to know more about how NHS Digital use your information, then you can visit their website.
Patients living in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland
If you live in Wales, Northern Ireland or Scotland, you can get information specific to your country about how your
government will use your information:
Wales
Northern Ireland
Scotland
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
