Containment Plan for Large
Outbreaks
Novel Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19)
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Government of India
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
On 31st
December 2019, the World Health Organization (WHO) China Country Office was
informed of cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology (unknown cause) detected in Wuhan
City, Hubei Province of China. On 7th
January 2020, Chinese authorities identified a new
strain of Coronavirus as the causative agent for the disease. The virus has been renamed by
WHO as SARS-CoV-2 and the disease caused by it as COVID-19. The disease since its first
detection in China has now spread to over 200 countries/territories, with reports of local
transmission happening in more than 160 of these countries/territories. As per WHO (as of 1st
April, 2020), there has been a total of 823626 confirmed cases and 40598 deaths due to
COVID-19 worldwide.
In India, as on 2nd
April, 2020, 1965 confirmed cases (including 51 foreign nationals) and 50
deaths reported from 29 States/UTs. Large number of cases has been reported from Delhi,
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh.
1.2. Risk Assessment
COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by WHO on 11th
March, 2020. While earlier the focus
of spread was centered on China, it has now shifted to Europe and North America. WHO has
advised countries to take a whole-of-government, whole-of-society approach, built around a
comprehensive strategy to prevent infections, save lives and minimize impact.
In India also, clusters have appeared in multiple States, particularly Kerala, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Punjab, Karnataka, Telangana and UT of Ladakh. 211
districts are now reporting COVID-19 cases and the risk of further spread remains very high.
1.3. Epidemiology
Coronaviruses belong to a large family of viruses, some causing illness in people and others
that circulate among animals, including camels, cats, bats, etc. Rarely, animal corona viruses
may evolve and jump species to infect people and then spread between people as witnessed
during the outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS, 2003) and Middle East
Respiratory Syndrome (MERS, 2014). The etiologic agent responsible for current outbreak of
SARS-CoV-2 is a novel coronavirus closely related to SARS-Coronavirus.
In humans, the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 can occur via respiratory secretions (directly
through droplets from coughing or sneezing, or indirectly through contaminated objects or
surfaces as well as close contacts). Nosocomial transmission has been described as an
important driver in the epidemiology of SARS and MERS and has also been documented in
COVID-19.
Current estimates of the incubation period of COVID range from 2-14 days, and these
estimates will be refined as more data become available. Most common symptoms
include fever, fatigue, dry cough and breathing difficulty. Upper respiratory tract symptoms
like sore throat, rhinorrhoea, and gastrointestinal symptoms like diarrhoea and nausea/
vomiting are seen in about 20% of cases.
Due to paucity of scientific literature based on community based studies, the available data
on host factors is skewed towards cases requiring hospitalization. As per analysis of the
biggest cohort reported by Chinese CDC, about 81% of the cases are mild, 14% require
hospitalization and 5% require ventilator and critical care management. The deaths reported
are mainly among elderly population particularly those with co-morbidities.
At the time of writing this document, many of the crucial epidemiological information
particularly source of infection, mode of transmission, period of infectivity, etc. are still
under investigation.
2. Strategic Approach
India would be following a scenario based approach for the following possible
scenarios:
i. Travel related case reported in India
ii. Local transmission of COVID-19
iii. Large outbreaks amenable to containment
iv. Wide-spread community Transmission of COVID-19 disease
v. India becomes endemic for COVID-19
2.1. Strategic Approach for Scenario: “Travel related cases reported from India”
(i) Inter-Ministerial coordination (Group of Ministers, Committee of Secretaries) and
Centre-State co-ordination been established.
(ii) Early detection through universal screening of all International passengers at Points of
Entries (PoEs).
(iii) Surveillance and contact tracing through Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme
(IDSP) for tracking travellers in the community who have travelled from affected
countries.
(iv)Early diagnosis through testing samples of suspect cases.
(v) Buffer stock of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) maintained.
(vi)Risk communication for creating awareness among public to follow preventive public
health measures.
2. 2. Local transmission of COVID-2019 disease
Local transmission will lead to clustering of cases in time and space, epidemiologically
linked to a travel related case or a positive case that has links to a travel related case. The
cluster containment strategy will be:
• Extensive contact tracing and active search for cases in containment zone
• Testing all suspect cases and high risk contacts
• Isolating all suspect / confirmed cases and providing medical care.
• Quarantining contacts
• Implementing social distancing measures.
• Intensive risk communication.
2.3 Large outbreaks amenable to containment
The strategy will remain the same as explained in para 2.2 as above but vary in extent
depending upon spread and response to be mounted to contain it. Geographic quarantine and
containment strategy will include:
• Defining the area of operation
• Active surveillance for cases and contacts in the identified geographic zone.
• Expanding laboratory capacity for testing all suspect cases, high risk contacts and
SARI cases.
• Operationalize surge capacities created for isolation (COVID-19 hospitals/COVID-19
dedicated blocks) to hospitalize and manage all suspect / confirmed cases.
• Implementation of social distancing measures with strict perimeter control.
• Provide chemoprophylaxis with Hydroxy-chloroquine to all asymptomatic healthcare
workers and asymptomatic household contacts of laboratory confirmed cases.
• Further intensification of risk communication through audio, social and visual media.
3. Scope of this Document
In alignment with strategic approach, this document provides action that needs to be taken for
containing a large outbreak. The actions for mitigation phase will be dealt separately under a
mitigation plan.
4. Objective
The objective of this plan is to stop the chain of transmission thus reducing the morbidity and
mortality due to COVID-19.
5. Containment for large outbreaks through geographic quarantine
5.1 Geographic quarantine
Geographic quarantine (cordon sanitaire) strategy calls for near absolute interruption of
movement of people to and from a relatively large defined geographic area where there is
single large outbreak or multiple foci of local transmission of COVID-19. In simple terms, it
is a barrier erected around the focus of infection.
Geographic quarantine shall be applicable to such areas reporting large outbreak and/or
multiple clusters of COVID-19 spread over multiple blocks of one or more districts that are
contiguous.
5.2. Cluster Containment Strategy
The Cluster Containment Strategy would be to contain the disease within a defined
geographic area by early detection of cases, breaking the chain of transmission and thus
preventing its spread to new areas. This would include geographic quarantine, social
distancing measures, enhanced active surveillance, testing all suspected cases, isolation of
cases, quarantine of contacts and risk communication to create awareness among public on
preventive public health measures.
5.3. Evidence for implementing geographic quarantine
In 2009, during the H1N1 Influenza pandemic it was observed that well connected big cities
with substantive population movement were reporting large number of cases, whereas rural
areas and smaller towns with low population densities and relatively poor road/ rail/ airway
connectivity were reporting only few cases.
The current geographic distribution of COVID-19 mimics the distribution of H1N1 Pandemic
Influenza. This suggests that while the spread of COVID-19 in our population could be high,
it’s unlikely that it will be uniformly affecting all parts of the country. This calls for
differential approach to different regions of the country, while mounting a strong containment
effort in hot spots.
Large scale measures to contain COVID-19 over large territories have been tried in China.
Mathematical modeling studies have suggested that containment might be possible especially
when other public health interventions are combined with an effective social distancing
strategy.
5.4. Factors affecting large outbreak cluster containment
A number of variables determine the success of the containment operations through
geographic quarantine. These are:
(i) Number and size of the cluster/s.
(ii) Effectiveness of geographic quarantine.
(iii) How efficiently the virus is transmitting in Indian population, taking into account
environmental factors especially temperature and humidity.
(iv) Public health response in terms of active case finding, testing of large number of
cases, immediate isolation of suspect and confirmed cases and quarantine of
contacts.
(v) Geographical characteristics of the area (e.g. accessibility, natural boundaries)
(vi) Population density and their movement (including migrant population).
(vii) Ability to ensure basic infrastructure and essential services.
6. Action Plan for Geographic quarantine
6.1. Legal framework
The Central Government /State Government should review the existing legal instruments that
provide legal support to implement the containment plan. Some of the Acts/ Rules for
consideration could be (i) Disaster Management Act (2005) (ii) Epidemic Act (1897) (iii)
Cr.PC and (iv) State Specific Public Health Act.
The Home Ministry has delegated the powers under DM Act, 2005 [ Section 10 sub-section
2 clauses (i) and (l)] to Secretary (Health and Family Welfare) to act in such a way to contain
or control the outbreak. States may invoke the provisions under DM Act,2005 or under the
Epidemic Act,1897 to delegate powers to identified authority to act in such a manner to
control or contain the outbreak.
Indian Penal Code under sections 270 provides power to act against those indulging in spread
of disease. Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, when invoked, prohibits
gathering of people.
6.1. Institutional mechanisms and Inter-sectoral Co-ordination
At the Union Government level
6.1.1 The Group of Ministers (GoM) under the Chairmanship of Union Health Minister will
be the apex body to take policy decisions. The GoM will have Ministers of External Affairs,
Civil Aviation, Shipping, Pharmaceuticals, Home Ministry and option for co-opting any other
Ministry. The Union Health Minister will have an advisory Group that will advise him on
way forward. The Public Health Working Group under Secretary (H) and Joint Monitoring
Group under DGHS will provide technical inputs.
6.1.2. At the national level, the Cabinet Secretary/ National Crisis Management Committee
(NCMC) / Committee of Secretaries (CoS) will review the situation across the country and
continue to direct the concerned Ministries to implement its directions . The co-ordination
with health and non-health sectors will be managed by NCMC/ CoS, on issues, flagged by
Ministry of Health.
The scale of arrangement within the Ministry of health will be expanded with additional areas
among the core capacities assigned to various officers. If need be, there will be empowered
group taking decisions for the core areas of work (planning-co-ordination, surveillance,
laboratory support, hospital preparedness, human resource, logistics and data analysis)
At the State level
6.1.3. The Concerned State will activate State Crisis Management Committee or the State
Disaster Management Authority, as the case may be to manage the clusters of COVID-19.
Institutional arrangement at the operational level
6.1.4. District Collector would be the nodal person for all preparedness and response
activities within his jurisdiction. District Collector will hold regular meetings with health
functionaries, DDMA, Revenue, PWD, Forest, Education and Panchayati Raj/ Local Self
Governance Departments where the containment plan will be finalized and operationalized.
These officials will issue directions to their ground level staff in all aspects of preparedness,
control and containment in accordance with the Containment Plan and Guidelines.
District Collector would need to identify key issues (logistics, legal, technical and resources)
and address them for implementing containment operations. He/she will keep ready all
administrative orders for social distancing, restriction of rail/road/air transport, perimeter
control and continuity of essential services.
In addition, a compendium of all the administrative orders required for enforcing the non-
pharmaceutical interventions would be prepared well in advance and kept ready to be
executed during response phase.
6.2. Trigger for Action
Epidemiological intelligence on increase in the incidence of a COVID-19 cases occurring
within a defined geographic area will be trigger for action. This will be provided by IDSPs
early warning and response (EWAR) system. Routine laboratory based surveillance of SARI
cases is another trigger for action.
6.3. Deployment of Rapid Response Teams (RRT)
Emergency Medical Relief (EMR) division, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will
deploy the Central Rapid Response Team (RRT) to support and advice the State. The State
will deploy its own State RRT and District RRT.
6.4. Identify area under geographic quarantine
6.4.1 A large outbreak is defined as localized increase in the incidence of a COVID-19
cases occurring within a defined geographic area e.g., in a village, town, or city. This could
also imply progression of a small cluster, earlier noticed for which cluster management action
is under implementation, into multiple clusters.
6.4.2. Defining containment and buffer zones: The area under geographic quarantine will be
defined. There shall be (i) containment zone, surrounded by (ii) buffer zone.
Boundary for geographic quarantine will be defined based on : (i) geospatial distribution of
each cluster contained within, (ii) largest administrative unit containing all clusters occurring
within a state (with a minimum of 1 district), (iii) feasibility to implement strict interruption
of movement of people, (iv) joint assessment by State and Central RRTs.
6.4.3. Buffer Zone
The adjoining blocks of the affected district or rural districts of the affected city will be
considered as the buffer zone.
6.4.4 Perimeter
Perimeter of the geographically quarantined will be decided by the State administration based
on criteria defined in Para 6.4.1. Clear entry and exit points will be established. The perimeter
controls that need to be applied is in para 7.4.
7. Surveillance
7.1. Surveillance in containment zone, including contact listing, tracking and follow up
shall be carried out as detailed in Cluster Containment Plan. Contact tracing shall be as per
IDSP guidelines on the same.
7.2 Precise mapping of the outbreak shall be carried out.
7.3. Passive Surveillance shall be enhanced all throughout the area under geographic
quarantine and districts surrounding it for ILI and SARI cases. All hospitalized patients with
Severe Acute Respiratory Illness shall also be tested for COVID-19.
Containment Zone
Buffer Zone
7.4. Perimeter Control
The perimeter control will ensure that there is no unchecked outward movement of
population from the containment zone except for maintaining essential services (including
medical emergencies) and government business continuity. Thermal screening, IEC shall be
carried out at all entry and exit points.
All vehicular movement, movement of public transport and personnel movement will be
stopped. All roads including rural roads connecting the containment zone will be guarded by
Police. For personnel and vehicles requiring regular movement, a pass/ID card may be issued
with details recorded and communicated.
The District administration will post signs and create awareness informing public about the
perimeter control. Health workers posted at the exit point will perform screening (e.g.
interview travelers, measure temperature, record the place and duration of intended visit and
keep complete record of intended place of stay).
Details of all persons moving out of perimeter zone for essential/ emergency services will be
recorded and they will be followed up through IDSP. Those entering such geographically
quarantined areas shall be given a chemo-prophylactic dose of hydroxy-chloroquine. All
vehicles moving out of the perimeter control will be decontaminated with sodium
hypochlorite (1%) solution.
8. Laboratory support
8.1 Designated laboratories
The identified VRDL network laboratories and designated private laboratories nearest to the
affected area, will be further strengthened to test samples. The other available govt.
laboratories and private laboratories (BSL 2 following BSL 3 precautions) shall also be
engaged to collect/ test samples, after ensuring quality assurance by ICMR/VRDL network. If
the number of samples exceeds its surge capacity, samples will be shipped to other nearby
laboratories or to NCDC, Delhi or NIV, Pune or to other ICMR lab networks depending upon
geographic proximity.
All test results should be available within 12-24 hours of sampling. ICMR along with the
State Government will ensure that there are designated agencies for sample transportation to
identified laboratories. The contact number of such courier agencies shall be a part of the
micro-plan.
The designated laboratory will provide daily update (daily and cumulative) to District, State
and Central Control Rooms on:
i. No. of samples received
ii. No. of samples tested
iii. No. of samples under testing
iv. No. of positive samples
8.2 Testing criteria
Laboratory/s will undertake testing of: (i) All symptomatic individuals who have undertaken
international travel in the last 14 days (ii) All symptomatic contacts of laboratory confirmed
cases, (iii) All symptomatic health care workers, (iv) All hospitalized patients with SARI and
(v) Asymptomatic direct and high-risk contacts of a confirmed case should be tested once
between day 5 and day 14 of coming in his/her contact.
The testing will continue till 14 days from the date the last confirmed case is declared
negative by laboratory test.
9. Hospital care
All suspect/confirmed COVID-19 cases will be hospitalized and kept in isolation in dedicated
COVID-19 hospitals/hospital blocks. Persons testing positive for COVID-19 will remain
hospitalized till such time as two of their samples are tested negative as per discharge policy.
About 15% of the patients are likely to require hospitalization, and an additional 5 % will
requires ventilator management.
A three tier arrangement for managing suspect/ confirmed cases will be implemented to
decrease burden on the COVID Block/ hospital.
(i) The mild cases will be kept in temporary makeshift hospital facilities by
converting hotels/ hostel/ guest houses/ stadiums near a COVID-19 hospital.
The existing quarantine facility may also be converted. This will be identified near
an existing COVID hospital/ COVID block.
(ii) Dedicated COVID-19 hospitals/dedicated blocks in large hospitals will be
identified and operationalized. Moderate to severe cases, who require monitoring
of their clinical status (patients with radiological evidence of pneumonia) will be
admitted to COVID hospital.
(iii) Some of the severe cases may progress respiratory failure and /or progress to
multi-organ failure and hence critical care facility/ dialysis facility/ and Salvage
therapy [Extra Corporeal Membrane Oxygenator (ECMO)] facility for managing
the respiratory/renal complications/ multi-organ failure shall be required. If such
facilities are not available in the containment zone, nearest tertiary care facility in
Government / private sector needs to be identified, that becomes a part of the
micro-plan.
In every hospital fever clinics with triage, holding areas, sampling stations and individual
doctor’s chambers where patients with fever/cough/breathing difficulty will be attended will
be established.
9.1 Surge capacity
Based on the risk assessment, if the situation so warrants ( if data suggests an exponential rise
in the number of cases), the surge capacity of the identified hospitals will be enhanced,
private hospitals will be roped in and sites identified for temporary hospitals will be
operationalized.
Surge capacity will also need enhancement in terms of laboratory testing capacity as detailed
in para 8.1 above.
9.2 Pre-hospital care (ambulance facility)
Ambulances need to be in place for transportation of suspect/confirmed cases. Such
ambulances shall be manned by personnel adequately trained in Infection Prevention and
Control (IPC), use of PPE and protocol that needs to be followed for disinfection of
ambulances (by 1% sodium hypochlorite solution using knapsack sprayers).
For any further guidance Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for transporting a
suspect/confirmed case of COVID-19 may be referred to (Available at:
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/StandardOperatingProcedureSOPfortransportingasuspectorco
nfirmedcaseofCOVID19.pdf)
9.3 Infection Prevention Control Practices
Health care associated infections among attending healthcare personnel are well documented
in the current COVID-19 outbreak. There shall be strict adherence to Infection prevention
control (IPC) practices in all health facilities. IPC committees would be formed (if not
already in place. The designated hospitals will ensure that all healthcare staff is trained in
washing of hands, respiratory etiquettes, donning/doffing & proper disposal of PPEs and bio-
medical waste management.
At all times doctors, nurses and para-medics working in the clinical areas will wear three
layered surgical mask and gloves. The medical personnel working in isolation and critical
care facilities where aerozolisation is anticipated, will wear full complement of PPE
(including N95 masks).
The support staff engaged in cleaning and disinfection will also wear full complement of
PPE. Environmental cleaning should be done twice daily and consist of damp dusting and
floor mopping with Lysol or other phenolic disinfectants and cleaning of commonly touched
surfaces with sodium hypochlorite solution.
Detailed guidelines available MoHFW’s website on (i) Infection prevention and control in
healthcare facilities, (ii) Rational use of Personal Protective Equipment, may be referred to.
All healthcare workers must be advised to self-monitor their health and report any breach in
IPC practices or occurrence of any illness.
10. Clinical management
10.1. Clinical Management
The hospitalized cases may require symptomatic treatment for fever. Paracetamol is the drug
of choice. Suspect cases with co-morbid conditions, if any, will require appropriate
management of co-morbid conditions.
For patients with Severe Acute Respiratory Illness (SARI), having respiratory distress may
require, pulse oxymetry, oxygen therapy, non-invasive and invasive ventilator therapy.
Detailed guidelines available on MoHFW’s website and updated from time to time, may be
followed.
Doctors managing severe COVID cases may contact AIIMS, Delhi (helpline - 9971876591)
or through tele-medicine network to seek guidance for management of severe cases.
10.2. Discharge Policy
Discharge policy for suspected cases of COVID-19 tested negative will be based on the
clinical assessment of the treating physician. For those tested positive for COVID-19, their
discharge from hospital will be based on consecutive two samples tested negative and the
patient is free from symptoms.
11. Psychosocial support
Quarantine, isolation and being affected by a new disease, all can be very stressful for those
involved and for their family members. Social distancing measures that force one to stay at
home and resulting social isolation can be frustrating. This apart, the healthcare workers
working under the fear of an unknown disease, under stressful and demanding situations,
impact their mental well-being. A guidance note on dealing with various mental issues is
available at:
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/MindingourmindsduringCoronaeditedat.pdf.
The National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS) will be the nodal
agency to plan and execute psycho-social support. NIHMANS will prepare a Psycho-Social
Support plan and implement the same in the COVID affected areas.
12. Pharmaceutical interventions
As of now there is no approved specific drug or vaccine for cure or prevention of COVID-19.
However Hydroxychloroquine has been recommended as chemoprophylaxis drug for use by
asymptomatic healthcare workers managing COVID-19 cases and asymptomatic contacts of
confirmed COVID-19 cases (advisory issued by ICMR in this regard is available at:
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/AdvisoryontheuseofHydroxychloroquinasprophylaxisforSAR
SCoV2infection.pdf).
In addition a combination of Hydroxychloroquine and Azithromycin has been advocated for
use in severe cases of COVID-19 under medical supervision. (Guideline on clinical
management protocol of COVID-19 is available at:
https://www.mohfw.gov.in/pdf/RevisedNationalClinicalManagementGuidelineforCOVID193
1032020.pdf)
Contacts and healthcare workers receiving Hydroxycholoroquine as chemoprohylaxis will be
informed to report any untoward health event to nearest health facility.
13. Non-Pharmaceutical interventions
In the absence of proven drug or vaccine, non-pharmaceutical interventions will be the main
stay for containment of COVID-19 cluster.
13.1. Preventive public health measures
There will be intensive social mobilization among the population in geographic quarantine
zone for adoption of community-wide practice of frequent washing of hands and respiratory
etiquettes. The community will also be encouraged to self-monitor their health and report to
the ASHA/Anganwadi worker visiting home or to nearest health facility.
13.2. Quarantine and isolation
Quarantine and Isolation are important mainstay of cluster containment. These measures help
by breaking the chain of transmission in the community.
13.2.1. Quarantine
Quarantine refers to separation of individuals who are not yet ill but have been exposed to
COVID-19 and therefore have a potential to become ill. There will be home quarantine/
facility quarantine of contacts of suspect /confirmed cases. The guideline on home quarantine
available on the website of the Ministry provides detailed guidance on home quarantine.
The contacts advised quarantine will undergo risk profiling. Those above 60 or with co-
morbidities will be shifted to designated quarantine facility. This will help identify early
development of symptoms among them, their testing and shifting to isolation facility under
para 9.
13.2.2. Isolation
Isolation refers to separation of individuals who are ill and suspected or confirmed of
COVID-19. There are various modalities of isolating a patient. Ideally, patients can be
isolated in individual isolation rooms or negative pressure rooms with 12 or more air-changes
per hour.
In resource constrained settings, all positive COVID-19 cases can be cohorted in a ward with
good ventilation. Similarly, all suspect cases should also be cohorted in a separate ward.
However, under no circumstances these cases should be mixed up. The COVID hospital/
COVID block in an identified hospital or the make shift temporary hospitals mentioned under
para 9 will all have separate facilities to keep suspect and confirmed cases.
A minimum distance of 1 meter needs to be maintained between adjacent beds. All such
patients need to wear a triple layer surgical mask at all times.
13.3 Social distancing measures
For the cluster containment, social distancing measures are key interventions to rapidly
curtail the community transmission of COVID-19 by limiting interaction between infected
persons and susceptible hosts. The following measures would be taken:
13.3.1 Closure of schools, colleges and work places
Administrative orders will be issued to close schools, colleges and work places in
containment and buffer zones. Intensive risk communication campaign will be followed to
encourage all persons to stay indoors for an initial period of 28 days, to be extended based on
the risk assessment. Based on the risk assessment and indication of successful containment
operations, an approach of staggered work and market hours may be put into practice.
13.3.2 Cancellation of mass gatherings
All mass gathering events and meetings in public or private places, in the containment and
buffer zones shall be cancelled / banned till such time as the area is declared to be free of
COVID-19 or the outbreak has increased to such scales to warrant mitigation measures
instead of containment.
13.3.3. Advisory to avoid public places
The public in the containment and buffer zones will be advised to avoid public places and
only, if necessary, for attending to essential services. The administration will ensure supply of
enough triple layer masks to the households in the containment and buffer zones to be
distributed through visiting surveillance teams.
13.3.4. Cancellation of public transport (bus/rail)
There will be prohibition for persons entering the geographic quarantine and on persons
exiting the geographic quarantine zone. To facilitate this, if there are major bus transit hubs
or railway stations in the containment zone, the same would be made dysfunctional
temporarily. Additionally, irrespective of the fact that there is a rail/road transit hub, the
perimeter control will take care of prohibiting people exiting the containment zone including
those using private vehicles and taxies.
As a significant inconvenience is caused to the public by adopting these measures in the
containment zone, State government would proactively engage the community and work with
them to make them understand the benefits of such measures.
13.3.5. Enforcement of Geographic quarantine.
The perimeter control and movement of vehicles within the containment zone will be
prohibited except for those (identified through special passes) earmarked for providing
essential services. Police check-posts at prominent locations will check vehicles and give
necessary guidance by police. Those found defaulting of Government orders will be
prosecuted.
14. Material Logistics
14.1. Personal Protective Equipment
The type of personal protective equipment for different categories of:
S. No. Name of the
item
Category of personnel
1 PPE Kit, N
95, Mask,
Gloves,
Goggles, cap
and shoe
cover )
• Doctors and nurses attending to patients in isolation, ICU/
critical care facilities of hospitals in the containment zone.
• Para-medical staff in the back cabin of ambulance performing
interventional lifesaving maneuvers.
• Those working in laboratories or collecting sample
2 N-95 Mask
and gloves
• Supervisory doctors verifying a suspect case
• Doctors/nurses attending patients in Screening fever clinics/
respiratory clinics / primary health care facilities
3 Triple Layer
Surgical mask
• To be used by Field workers doing surveillance work
• Staff providing essential services.
• Suspect cases and care giver / by stander of the suspect case
• Security staff.
• Ambulance drivers
The State Government has to ensure adequate stock of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).
The quantity required for a containment operation will depend upon the size and extent of the
cluster and the time required for containing it. States will also ensure that the PPE are being
used in accordance with the guidelines on rational use of PPE.
14.2. Transportation
A large number of vehicles will be required for mobilizing the surveillance and supervisory
teams. The vehicles will be pooled from Government departments. The shortfall, if any, will
be met by hiring of vehicles.
14.3. Stay arrangements for the field staff
The field staff brought in for the surveillance activities and that for providing perimeter
control need to be accommodated within the containment zone. Facilities such as schools,
community buildings, etc. will be identified for sheltering. Catering arrangement will have to
be made at these locations.
14.4 Bio-medical waste management
A large quantity of bio-medical waste is expected to be generated from containment zone.
Arrangement would also be required for such bio-medical waste (discarded PPEs, etc.),
preferably by utilizing the bio-medical waste management services at the designated hospital.
15. Risk communication
15.1 Risk communication material
Risk communication materials [comprising: (i) posters and pamphlets (ii) audio only
material (iii) AV films (prepared by PIB/MoHFW)] will be prepared and kept ready for
targeted roll out in the entire geographic quarantine zone.
15.2 Communication channels
15.2.1 Interpersonal communication
During house to house surveillance, ASHAs/ other community health workers will interact
with the community for: (i) reporting symptomatic cases (ii) contact tracing (iii) information
on preventive public health measures.
15.2.2 Mass communication
Awareness will be created among the community through miking, distribution of pamphlets,
mass SMS and social media. Also use of radio and television (using local channels) will
ensure penetration of health messages in the target community.
15.2.3 Dedicated helpline
A dedicated helpline number will be provided at the Control Room (District Headquarter)
and its number will be widely circulated for providing general population with information
on risks of COVID-19 transmission, the preventive measures required and the need for
prompt reporting to health facilities, availability of essential services and administrative
orders on perimeter control.
15.2.4 Media Management
At the Central level, only Secretary (H) or representative nominated by her shall address the
media. At the State level, only Principal Secretary (H), his/her nominee will speak to the
media. At the District level DM/DC will address the media.
There will be regular press briefings/ press releases to keep media updated on the
developments and avoid stigmatization of affected communities. Every effort shall be made
to address and dispel any misinformation circulating in media including social media.
16. Information Management
16.1 Control room at State & District Headquarters
A Control Room (if not already in place) shall be set up at State and District headquarters.
This shall be manned by State and District Surveillance Officer (respectively) under which
data managers (deployed from IDSP/ NHM) responsible for collecting, collating and
analyzing data from field and health facilities. Daily situation reports will be put up.
The state will provide aggregate data on daily basis on the following (for the day and
cumulative):
i. Total number of suspect cases
ii. Total number of confirmed cases
iii. Total number of critical cases on ventilator
iv. Total number of deaths
v. Total number of contacts under surveillance
16.2 Control Room in the geographic quarantine zone
A Control Room shall be set up inside the geographic quarantine zone to facilitate collection,
collation and dissemination of data from various field units to District and State Control
Rooms. This shall be manned by an epidemiologist under which data managers (deployed
from IDSP/ NHM) will be responsible for collecting, collating and analyzing data from field
and health facilities.
This Control Room will provide daily input to the District Control Room for preparation of
daily situation report.
16.3 Alerting the neighboring Districts/States
The Control Room at State Government Headquarters will alert all neighboring Districts.
There shall be enhanced surveillance in all such Districts for detection of clustering of
symptomatic illness. Awareness will be created in the community for them to report
symptomatic cases/contacts.
Also suitable provisions shall be created for enhancing horizontal communication between
adjacent districts, especially for contact tracing exercise and follow up of persons exiting the
containment zone.
17. Capacity building
It is expected that in such circumstances, large human resource requirement will be there to
manage: (i) Field activities including surveillance, (ii) Clinical care at hospitals, (iii)
laboratory testing and (iv) support staff to provide support services.
17.1 Training content
Trainings will be designed to suit requirement of each and every section of healthcare worker
involved in the containment operations. These trainings for different target groups shall
cover:
1. Field surveillance, contact tracing, data management and reporting
2. Surveillance at designated exit points from the containment zone
3. Sampling, packaging and shipment of specimen
4. Hospital infection prevention and control including use of appropriate PPEs and bio-
medical waste management
5. Clinical care of suspect and confirmed cases including ventilator management,
critical care management
6. Risk communication to general community and health service providers
17.2 Target trainee population
Various sections of healthcare workforce (including specialist doctors, medical officers,
nurses, ANMs, Block Extension Educators, MHWs, ASHAs) and workforce from non-health
sector (security personnel, Anganwadi Workers, support staff etc.). Trainings will be tailored
to requirements of each of these sections.
Prepare Training plan and calendar for undertaking training of non-health workers (including
trainee ANM), volunteers from Red Cross, Civil Defence, NCC, NSS, Nehru Yuvak Kendra
volunteers, Panchayati Raj functionaries (rozgar sewaks) on community surveillance (self-
protection, brief questionnaire interview and reporting to supervisors).
Train all available clinical resources (respiratory physicians, anaesthetists, intensivists,
MBBS doctors who have handled ventilators, including DNB and MD students) on clinical
and ventilatory management.
The training resources available at IGOT platform of GoI may be utilized.
The training will be conducted by the RRT a day prior to containment operations are
initiated.
17.3 Replication of training in other Districts
The State Govt. will ensure that unaffected Districts are also trained along the same lines so
as to strengthen the core capacities of their RRTs, doctors, nurses, support staff and non-
health field formations. These trainings should be accompanied with functional training
exercises like mock-drills.
18. Financing of containment operations
The fund requirement would be estimated taking into account the scale of operations and
funds will be made available to the district collector from NHM flexi-fund. The SDRF funds
can also be used as per notification issued by Ministry of Home Affairs.
19. Scaling down of operations
The operations will be scaled down if no secondary laboratory confirmed COVID-19 case is
reported from the geographic quarantine zone for at least four weeks after the last confirmed
test has been isolated and all his contacts have been followed up for 28 days. The
containment operation shall be deemed to be over 28 days from the discharge of last
confirmed case (following negative tests as per discharge policy) from the designated health
facility i.e. when the follow up of hospital contacts will be complete.
The closing of the surveillance for the clusters could be independent of one another provided
there is no geographic continuity between clusters. However the surveillance will continue
for ILI/SARI.
However, if the containment plan is not able to contain the outbreak and large numbers of
cases start appearing, then a decision will need to be taken by State administration to abandon
the containment plan and start on mitigation activities.
