Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for food businesses on coronavirus
(COVID-19)
Published 25 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for food businesses
Public Health
England
What you need to know about coronavirus and food
It is very unlikely that you can catch coronavirus from food.
Contents
What you need to know about coronavirus and food
Food hygiene guidance
Managing employee sickness
Social distancing
Maintaining social distancing in specific food business settings
COVID-19 is a respiratory illness. It is not known to be transmitted by exposure to food or food packaging.
Any food handler who is unwell should not be at work. If they have symptoms, they should follow government advice and
stay at home.
Although it is very unlikely that coronavirus is transmitted through food, as a matter of good hygiene practice anyone
handling food should wash their hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. This should be done as a matter
of routine, before and after handling food, and especially after being in a public place, blowing their nose, coughing, or
sneezing.
Food business operators should continue to follow the Food Standard Agency’sguidance on good hygiene practices in
food preparation and their Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) processes.
We support measures to allow safe privileged access to supermarkets and food businesses for the elderly and essential
workers such as NHS staff.
Food hygiene guidance
A Food Safety Management System (
FSMS) that includes existing food hygiene guidance and Hazard Analysis and
Critical Control Point (HACCP) processes should be followed.
Employers should stress the importance of more frequent handwashing and maintaining good hygiene practices in food
preparation and handling areas. Employees should wash their hands for 20 seconds, especially after being in a public
place, blowing their nose, coughing or sneezing.
Frequently clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are touched regularly, using your standard cleaning products.
Food businesses can refer to the Food Standards Agency’s safer food, better business (SFBB) guidance for further
guidance on expected food hygiene standards.
Businesses can help reduce the spread of coronavirus by reminding everyone of the government’s public health advice.
Posters, leaflets and other materials are available online.
Food packaging
The World Health Organization advises that the likelihood of an infected person contaminating commercial goods is low.
The risk of catching the virus that causes COVID-19 from a package that has been moved, travelled, and exposed to
different conditions and temperature is also very low.
While food packaging is not known to present a specific risk, efforts should be made to ensure it is cleaned and handled in
line with usual food safety practices.
Cleaning should be in line with food hygiene practice and the environmental controls set out in the business’
HACCP. Staff
should continue to follow existing risk assessments and safe systems of working. No additional precautions need to be
taken.
Cleaning and waste disposal
The government has provided guidance oncleaning and waste disposal to help businesses reduce the spread of
coronavirus.
Managing employee sickness
If anyone becomes unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature in the business or workplace they should
be sent home and advised to follow the stay at home guidance. If you or an employee are experiencing symptoms, visit
NHS 111 online or call 111 if there is no internet access. In an emergency, call 999 if they are seriously ill or injured, or
their life is at risk. Do not visit the GP, pharmacy, urgent care centre or a hospital.
If a member of staff has helped someone who was taken unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature, they
do not need to go home unless they develop symptoms themselves. They should wash their hands thoroughly for 20
seconds after any contact with someone who is unwell with symptoms consistent with coronavirus infection.
It is not necessary to close the business or workplace or send any staff home, unless government policy changes. You
should keep monitoring the government response to coronavirus for further updates.
The Food Standards Agency’s fitness for work guidance for staff who handle food products provides advice on managing
sickness in a food business. Understanding this guidance and applying it on both a personal and business level can help
to prevent the transmission of coronavirus (COVID-19).
Social distancing
The advice on social distancing measures applies to everyone. You need to minimise opportunities for the virus to spread
by maintaining a distance of 2 metres between individuals. This advice applies to both inside the food business and in the
external public areas where customers may need to queue. People should be reminded to wash their hands for 20
seconds and more frequently than normal.
The practical implementation of this advice will depend on the local circumstances. This may be best evaluated by the
store manager, however a few general indicators may be relevant to the majority of retail outlets:
use additional signage to ask customers not to enter the shop if they have symptoms
regulate entry so that the premises do not become overcrowded
use floor markings inside the commercial spaces to facilitate compliance with the social distancing advice of 2 metres,
particularly in the most crowded areas, such as serving counters and tills
use vertical signage to direct customers into lanes if feasible to facilitate movement within the premises while
maintaining 2 metre distance
make regular announcements to remind customers to follow social distancing advice and clean their hands regularly
place plexiglass barriers at tills and counters if feasible, as an additional element of protection for workers and
customers
encourage the use of contactless payments where possible, without disadvantaging older or vulnerable customers
provide additional pop-up handwashing stations or facilities if possible, providing soap, water and hand sanitiser
Further information on social distancing and adults who are at increased risk of coronavirus (COVID-19)can be found on
GOV.UK.
Maintaining social distancing in specific food business settings
Food processing plants
Food safety practices in food processing plants should continue to be delivered to the highest hygiene standards including
the use of some personal protective equipment and frequent hand washing.
All employers are expected to follow social distancing guidance, including food businesses, as far as is reasonably
possible. Where the production environment makes it difficult to do so, employers should consider what measures may be
put in place to protect employees. Once staff have left the food processing areas and removed protective clothing, social
distancing and further hand washing guidance should be adhered to.
Supermarkets
Supermarkets need to avoid crowding and create adequate spacing between individuals.
Effective measures to support this will vary by store and location but could include:
monitoring the number of customers within store and limiting access to avoid congestion
implementing queue management systems to limit crowds gathering at entrances and maintain the 2 metres distance
reminding customers to only buy what they need
Public Health England supports measures to allow safe privileged access to elderly and essential workers such as NHS
and Social Care staff.
Staff canteens and rest areas
It is very unlikely that coronavirus is transmitted through food. Workplace canteens may remain open where there are no
practical alternatives for staff to obtain food.
as far as reasonably possible, a distance of 2 metres should be maintained between users
staff can continue to use rest areas if they apply the same social distancing
notices promoting hand hygiene and social distancing should be placed visibly in these areas
if possible, increase the number of hand washing stations available
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Takeaways and restaurants offering a pick-up service
For these services:
no orders should be taken in person on the premises - this should be communicated to customers by appropriate
means such as signage
businesses should therefore only take orders online or by telephone
customers could have staggered collection times - customers should be discouraged from entering the premises until
their order is ready
customers arriving without having already placed an order should be encouraged to leave the premises to place their
order by telephone or online, and to return at a designated time for collection
customers whose orders are ready should enter one at a time to collect orders and make payments
businesses should discourage crowding outside the premises. Where possible, use queue management systems to
maintain the 2 metres separation
Outdoor food markets / farmers markets
The main concern with outdoor food markets is to avoid crowds gathering. Local Authorities may have decided to close
such markets as part of actions taken to maintain social distancing.
Where markets are still in operation, we encourage food market operators to consider how they can safely sell their
products without encouraging crowds and ensure hygiene measures are in place. This can be done by:
taking orders online or by telephone in advance and pre-packing orders to limit face-to-face time in the market
considering delivery services if possible
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
