Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Priorities for SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) testing
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: investigation and initial clinical management of possible cases
Public Health
England
Latest updates to this page
2 April 2020: revised sections 3 and 4
1. Scope
Contents
Latest updates to this page
1. Scope
2. Prioritisation
3. Repeat testing
4. Step down testing
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
This guidance provides a priority order of testing for periods when triaging of requests is required. It also advises on
priorities for repeat testing given the demand for testing.
See current case definitions.
2. Prioritisation
Group 1 (test first): patient requiring critical care for the management of pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) or influenza like illness (
ILI)†, or an alternative indication of severe illness has been provided, for example, severe
pneumonia or ARDS
Group 2: all other patients requiring admission to hospital* for management of pneumonia,ARDS or ILI
Group 3: clusters of disease in residential or care settings, for example, long term care facilities and prisons (usually
samples from 5 cases are sufficient in these settings)
† ILI: fever ≥37.8°C and at least one of the following respiratory symptoms, which must be of acute onset: persistent
cough (with or without sputum), hoarseness, nasal discharge or congestion, shortness of breath, sore throat, wheezing,
sneezing.
*admission to hospital: a hospital practitioner has decided that admission to hospital is required with an expectation that
the patient will need to stay at least one night.
3. Repeat testing
If the patient is producing sputum or is intubated, a lower respiratory tract sample should be preferentially tested (rather
than upper respiratory tract samples) as SARS-CoV-2 can be present in the lower respiratory tract despite being
undetectable in the upper respiratory tract.
If a suitable lower respiratory tract sample is negative, repeat tests are not needed.
4. Step down testing
Priority testing for viral clearance should focus on:
the severely immunocompromised patients to support the optimal use of side rooms, or where side rooms are not
available
any testing which optimises patient flow through the hospital, such as:
long-stay patients who are unable to otherwise be discharged
those being discharged to a household where someone who is in extremely vulnerable person is being shielded
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
