Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19 and delaying hazardous waste consignee
returns: RPS C14
Published 30 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19 and delaying hazardous waste consignee returns: RPS C14
Normally, if you receive or dispose of hazardous waste, you must send quarterly consignee returns under the Hazardous
Contents
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
Conditions you must comply with
Enforcement
When to check back
Contact the Environment Agency
Waste (England and Wales) Regulations 2005 (SI 2005/894 as amended, the Regulations).
Regulations 53 and 54 respectively require you to send separate quarterly consignee returns to the:
Environment Agency
waste producer or holder
The next submission deadline is 30 April 2020.
If you follow the conditions in this COVID-19 regulatory position statement (
RPS), you can delay making your consignee
returns.
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
This COVID-19 RPS only applies to hazardous waste consignees who cannot comply with the quarterly return deadline of
30 April 2020 due to coronavirus (COVID-19) restrictions.
This COVID-19 RPS does not apply to any other activity, even if it is under the same legislation. You still need to consign
hazardous waste, and you may still need other permits, licences and registrations for other activities you carry out.
Conditions you must comply with
You must send your quarterly consignee returns, due on 30 April 2020, to the Environment Agency and the waste
producer or holder as soon as reasonably practical, and in any event by 31 July 2020.
You must fully document why you needed to use this COVID-
RPS and could not make your consignee returns by 30 April
2020. You must keep these documents for 2 years after this COVID-19 RPS has expired, including any extensions to it.
You must make them available to the Environment Agency on request.
Enforcement
A COVID-19 RPS means that the Environment Agency will not normally take enforcement action against you provided:
your activity meets the description set out in this COVID-19RPS
you comply with the conditions set out in this COVID-19RPS
your activity does not, and is not likely to, cause environmental pollution or harm human health
you have taken all reasonable steps to comply with the regulations
If you operate under this COVID-19 RPS, but think you may no longer be able to comply with its conditions, you must tell
the Environment Agency immediately.
The Environment Agency will monitor how operators use and comply with this COVID-19RPS through its proportionate,
risk-based inspection and monitoring activity.
When to check back
This COVID-19 RPS will expire on 31 July 2020 unless we extend it. After this date you must comply with the regulations
in full.
Contact the Environment Agency
For more information email the Environment Agency’s hazardous waste data team.
Email: hwreturnsteam@environment-agency.gov.uk
Please put this wording in the title of your email:
Waste COVID-19 RPS C14: for action
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
The UK has left the EU
Transition period: get ready for 2021
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
