SPOTLIGHT
• On the 2nd May 2020, 6 new cases of laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public
Health of Thailand (MoPH), bringing the total number of cases to 2,966. No deaths were reported today
• Of all reported cases, more than 92% (2,732) have recovered, about 1.8% (54) have died, and 6% (180) arereceiving
treatment
• Two cases were identified in people entering Thailand (from India and Japan); both are held in State QuarantineTwo
cases are close contacts of previously confirmed cases (in Bangkok and Phuket) and two cases were detectedthrough
active case finding in Phuket
• To date, 68 of the total 77 provinces have reported cases. 29 of these 68 provinces have not reported any newcases
during the past 28 days
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND
SITUATION
IN THE PAST
24 HOURS
54
Deaths
180
Hospitalized
103
Health care
staff cases
2,732
Recovered
Confirmed
(6 new)
2,966
02 May 2020 WHO Thailand Situation Report
UPDATE ON THE ADJUSTMENT OF RESTRICTIONS
• Following the extension of the Emergency Decree, the Government published Directives # 5 and 6 on 1st May to
provide guidance for the implementation of phase 1, effective 3rd May, including.
• The sale of alcoholis allowed, but consumption must be at home and gatherings are notallowed.ProvincialGovernors
have WKHauthority to ban such sales according to the local situation
• Travel between provinces should be avoided or delayed; anyone crossing provincial boundaries will bescreened at
checkpoints. Provincial Governors have WKHauthority to require quarantine for people travelLng fromprovinces where new
cases are still being reported
• Restaurants and food outlets in shopping malls can open, but only take-home service is allowed
x The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English, please visit.
x For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit.
x For global figures and technical advice from WHO, please visit.
USEFUL
LINKS
World Health Organization Country Office for Thailand
4th Fl., Permanent Secretary Bldg.3 Ministry of Public Health,
Nonthaburi Thailand, 11000
Media queries sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
WHOThailand
WHOThailand
@WHOThailand
www.who.int/thailand
For latest updates and resources, please visit:
• Business operators must follow guidance issued by the Department of Health (DoH)
• Five key measures are: cleaning, wearing masks, provision of hand washing stations, physicaldistancing, and
limiting the number of peopleRQVLWH.
• Additional measures are: temperature screening, reducing time spent in close contact, 1 metre spacingfor queuing
DQGincreasing ventilation
• An online platform “Thai stop COVID” is available at http://stopcovid.anamai.moph.go.th for businessoperators to
self-assess whether or not they meet DoH guidance.
• %usinesses will be VXEMHFWHGWRrandomFKHFNV. Members of the public are encouraged to contribute tomonitoring
the adherence RIbusiness operatorsWRJXLGDQFH
• The Center for COVID-19 Situation Administration reiterated that collaboration from the public is key. Decisions to
move to subsequent phases of re-opening will depend WKHnumber of new cases and of people violating curfew
• MoPH recommendations for individual behaviour after re-opening include:
• $OOSHRSOHHVSHFLDOO\WKRVHDWhigher risk such as older persons should avoid going outside home
• 3HRSOHVKRXOGDvoid close contact with others, especially any mass gathering
• (YHU\RQHVKRXOGZear a mask every time going outside home and wash WKHLUhands frequently
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand is in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public Health,
sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response, including working with key partners and the Ministry of Public Health to support
migrant populations in Thailand. WHO also provides information and advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the outbreak in
Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and kanpirom@who.int
