Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for shipping and sea ports on coronavirus
(COVID-19)
Updated 26 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: shipping and sea ports guidance
Department
for Transport
Maritime &
Coastguard
Agency
Public Health
England
Contents
What you need to know
Background
Symptoms
What you need to know
before boarding the ship, crew and passengers should be asked if they have a new, continuous cough or a high
temperature
if someone becomes unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature, they should be sent home or to their
cabin
everyone should be reminded to wash their hands for 20 seconds more frequently than normal
crew and passengers should be given clear instructions on what to do if they develop symptoms and how and to whom
they should report this
the Master of the Ship should notify the Port Health Authority about any suspected cases of coronavirus (COVID-19) as
soon as possible, who will then inform the local Health Protection Team (HPT)
appropriate use of personal protective equipment (PPE) and cleaning of surfaces that a person with symptoms has
come into contact with are key measures to stop the spread of the virus
Background
This guidance will assist ships (including cargo vessels, ferries and cruise ships) and sea ports in providing advice to staff
on addressing coronavirus (COVID-19), on ships and in sea ports.
Ships and sea ports will collectively be referred to as a ‘marine setting’ in this guidance.
This guidance may be updated in line with the changing situation.
Symptoms
The most common symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) are a new, continuous cough or a high temperature.
For most people, coronavirus (COVID-19) will be a mild infection.
What to do if you have had a person with confirmed coronavirus (COVID-
19) in a marine setting
If anyone becomes unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature in a marine setting, they should be sent
home, or to their cabin and advised to follow the stay at home guidance.
If they need clinical advice in England or Northern Ireland, theyvisit NHS 111 (or call 111 if they don’t have internet
access). If docked in Scotland, use NHS 24 and NHS Direct in Wales. In an emergency, call 999 if they are seriously ill or
injured or their life is at risk. Do not visit the GP, pharmacy, urgent care centre or a hospital.
If a member of staff or passenger has helped someone who was taken unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high
temperature, they do not need to go home unless they develop symptoms themselves. They should wash their hands
thoroughly for 20 seconds after any contact with someone who is unwell.
The HPT or equivalent local arrangements in Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland, will also advise on the process to follow
for disembarkation where this is relevant.
For a vessel, the Master should be informed and should report to the Port Health Authority. In England, the Port Health
Authority will liaise with the local Public Health England (PHE) HPT who can advise on assessment, testing and infection
control.
If anyone is severely unwell then contact should be made with the nearest Port Health Authority immediately in order to
arrange disembarkation and transfer to an appropriate facility. The Port Health Authority must be informed of possible
coronavirus (COVID-19) infection if this is suspected.
What to do if you have had a person with confirmed coronavirus (COVID-19) in a marine setting
Specific action for ships and shipping companies
Limiting spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) in marine settings
Cleaning and waste
Disembarkation
Useful links
Specific action for ships and shipping companies
Preparation
Pre-travel information to crew and customers should cover:
the symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19)
health risks and considerations on health services in other countries for vulnerable groups, such as elderly people or
those with underlying medical conditions
importance of preventive measures
any pre-boarding assessment
Ships should ensure adequate medical supplies, equipment andPPE are available onboard. Further details of supplies
specific to coronavirus (COVID-19) are available in the disease commodity package.
Pre-embarkation
Crew and passengers with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature should be denied embarkation or cabin
isolated.
All crew and passengers should be reminded of the need to report a new, continuous cough or a high temperature as
soon as possible with clear instructions on what they should do and the designated person that they must report to.
During the voyage
Ships are required to notify the port of arrival of any illness on board by submitting a Maritime Declaration of Health
(MDH).
Limiting spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) in marine settings
Marine settings can help reduce the spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) by reminding staff and passengers of the public
health advice. Posters, leaflets and other materials are available.
Staff and visitors should be reminded to wash their hands more frequently than normal.
Frequently clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are touched regularly, using your standard cleaning products.
In addition:
healthcare workers in close contact with a suspected case of coronavirus (COVID-19) should wear the correctPPE
staff should only go into the cabin if essential, and no-one should be allowed in the cabin unless wearing appropriate
PPE consisting of a fluid-repellent surgical face-mask, gloves and a disposable apron. Meals should be left outside the
door and normal housekeeping duties suspended
staff should wash their hands with soap and water for 20 seconds immediately after removingPPE, or alcohol hand
sanitiser can be used
advice about disposing of PPE is available as part of the guidance on cleaning and waste disposal below
Cleaning and waste
Guidance on cleaning and waste disposal is available.
Disembarkation
The Health Protection Team will advise on:
arrangements for disembarkation for possible cases
how close contacts will be managed
who may remain on the vessel
any recommended measures in terms of enhanced surveillance, reporting, cleaning and respiratory hygiene
any follow-up monitoring required and where necessary limitations to further travel
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Useful links
Healthy GateWays: Advice for ship operators for preparedness and response to the outbreak of COVID-19document
provides further information.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
