PRESS RELEASE (Sept. 21)
National Infectious Disease Risk Alert Level
Lowered from YELLOW to BLUE
Contact: Moon Sang-jun, Division of Public Health Preparedness and Response
(043-719-9061, untohim@korea.kr)

◇ National Infectious Disease Risk Alert Level Lowered from YELLOW to BLUE, IMS will continue
to be activated throughout the Chuseok holiday
◇ All 21 close contacts tested negative and will be released from quarantine on Sept. 22, 00:00
◇ Travelers to the Middle East during the holiday period are advised to follow health precautions
and asked to cooperate with quarantine measures upon entry to ROK
□ The Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW) and the Korea Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (KCDC) held a risk assessment meeting on the morning
of Sept. 21 and decided to lower the national infectious disease risk alert level
from YELLOW to BLUE starting from midnight (Sept. 22, 00:00).
* Alert level criteria:
BLUE - MERS case(s) abroad with no immediate threat of importation to ROK
YELLOW - domestic importation of MERS from abroad
ORANGE - confined spread of MERS within the country
RED - spread of MERS in communities across the country

○ The results of the confirmation tests conducted on Sept. 20 on the 21 quarantined
close contacts returned negative.
* Close contacts will be released from quarantine at the end of the 14-day monitoring period (Sept. 22, 00:00)
** Casual contacts (396 as of Sept. 21, 12:00) will no longer undergo active monitoring starting
from Sept. 22, 00:00

□ The national infectious disease risk alert level was lowered after taking into
consideration that:
a) there are no domestic cases of MERS following the negative test
results on Sept. 17 of the previously confirmed patient

- 1 -

b) there have been no additional confirmed cases among close contacts
over the 14-day monitoring period
○ All close contacts were tested twice for MERS infection and both tests
came back negative. As such, the results of the risk assessment meeting
determined that the risk of any additional domestic cases due to the
imported confirmed case is very low.
○ In the instance that there are no additional cases throughout the
remainder of the monitoring period, all quarantined close contacts will be
released from quarantine on Sept. 22, 00:00, and the national infectious
disease risk alert level will be lowered to BLUE.
○ Even after the risk level has been lowered to BLUE, operations will continue
to be conducted addressing the MERS situation regarding this imported case
until the end of the designated period*. The MERS IMS will continue to be
activated within the 24-hour Emergency Operations Center (EOC) to
strengthen surveillance and response to any potential MERS cases.
* Until Oct. 16, 28 days (twice as long as the MERS incubation period) following the
confirmed case's negative test results

□ KCDC expresses its utmost gratitude to the 21 quarantined close contacts,
casual contacts, and the general public for cooperating with preventive
measures, as well as healthcare professionals for all of their hard work.
○ KCDC will continue to work closely with relevant ministries, agencies, and local
governments to prevent the additional spread of MERS due to this imported case.
○ KCDC confirmed that it will review and assess any gaps in its MERS
response measures and improve upon them, as necessary.
○ Healthcare providers are advised to check the travel history of incoming
patients with respiratory symptoms to see if they have recently traveled to the
- 2 -

Middle East. The travel history of Korean nationals can be checked through
the Drug Usage Review (DUR) system, while that of foreign nationals can be
checked through direct questioning. Healthcare providers should report any
patients suspected of MERS-CoV infection to local public health centers or call
the KCDC Call Center at 1339.
○ When visiting the Middle East, individuals are advised to maintain proper
personal hygiene, such as washing hands frequently, and to avoid visits to
local farms, contact with camels, consumption of raw camel meat or camel
milk, and unnecessary visits to local medical facilities.
- Individuals are asked to cooperate with quarantine procedures, such as
honestly completing health status questionnaires at the time of entry.

- 3 -

Appendix
1

Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
Overview

Details
▫MERS cases have been identified in the Middle East around the Arabian
Peninsula, with approximately 2,229 confirmed cases around the world from

Cases and
Outbreaks

2012 to June 30, 2018 (according to WHO)
▫Since January 2018, there have been 116 confirmed MERS cases (as of
September 8, 2018) in the Middle East (114 in Saudi Arabia*, 1 in UAE, 1
in Oman)
* One case was infected in Saudi Arabia and imported the virus to the UK

Pathogen

▫Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus ; MERS-CoV
▫Although the mode of transmission is uncertain, animal-to-human transmission has

Mode of
Transmission

been observed through contact with infected camels and consumption of camel meat
and milk, and limited direct and indirect human-to-human transmission has been
observed through droplet infection following close contact with infected individuals

Incubation
Period

▫Approximately 2-14 days
▫MERS patients usually experience fever, cough, sputum, shortness of breath,
and other respiratory symptoms. They may also suffer from diarrhea, vomiting,

Symptoms and
Clinical Course

and other gastrointestinal symptoms.
▫Many patients have low lymphocyte or platelet counts
▫Case Fatality Rate: The prognosis for those with pre-existing conditions or
weakened immune systems is rather poor, with a fatality rate of approximately
30%

Diagnosis

Treatment

Case
Management

▫Routing confirmation is conducted by RT-PCR testing of unique sequences of viral
RNA; confirmation by nucleic sequencing can be conducted when necessary
▫There is no cure for MERS, but individuals can be treated for their symptoms

▫Cases: Isolation of suspected or confirmed cases
▫Close Contacts: Passive surveillance of contacts of suspected cases, isolation and
active surveillance of contacts of confirmed cases

▫Hand washing, cough etiquette, and maintaining proper personal hygiene

Prevention

▫For travelers to the Middle East
- Avoid contact with camels and crowded areas; wear a mask if you experience
respiratory symptoms; avoid contact with those who have respiratory symptoms

- 4 -

Appendix
2

MERS Educational Content (English & Arabic)

- 5 -

- 6 -

- 7 -

