 

F. No, 7.28005/23/2020-RMR
‘Government of India
nistry of Health and Fail

   

Welfare

Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated the 24% March, 2020

ORDER

‘The guidelines laid down by Indian Council of Metical Re

 

sarc for COVID- testing in

private lnboraares in India (as anneved) is notified vide Clause (i) and (Do sub-section 2 of
Section I0 of DM Act, 200
(As dated ® March, 2020 for strict follow up and eommplians.

 

S, under the power delegated vide onder P, NO. 40-2/202I-DMIT

fe

Ministry of Health & Family Weltae
Government of India
Guidetines for COVID-I9 testing in private laboratories in India

‘The testo be conducted by a laboratory whieh has NAIL accreditation for real-time
PCR assay for RNA views.

Whom eo test

Laboratory teat should oaly he offre whon prescribed by a yoalilied piysisian a
ICMR guidleines for COVID-'9 testing Sine

 

   

हि evolves periodically the latest
revised version should be fllowod {link below).

०४७०९ ०/४॥९५४४९७७॥/॥॥७४/५७७७४ documents/2020.03-20 cava test v3.0ay wor.
moh gor i

Sample collection und Testing guidelines:

+ Appropriate biosafety and bis tations should be ensured while collet

 

»
respiratory samples (oropharnygeal and nasal swab} frum o suspect patient

 

Altemarively, a COVID-L9 spesifie separate sample collection site may he seared.

  

+ Preferably, ome collsetion of samples may be due by all fos private laboratories

 

‘This will hep avoid the contact of eaple withthe suspect case during local travel ७०
reach the laboratory

4+ Only wea sime PCR hased assays ave recommended, Conventional POR, ivimuse real
time POR and antibody antigen tests are nol recommended for COVIDI9 esting

+ Comm

 

cial his fr foal ime PCR bused diagiosis of COVIL-I9 shoul be US FDA

 

approved or Luropean CE Cortfed or both for in vire diagnosis of COVID-I9 unde
Cemergeney use, under intimation to DCG, Moll&FW, Noelsie acld extrusion kits
nd other reagents shouldbe of stndard cushy

© Allthe lb

 

ony staf? Snvalved is COVID-I9 resting should he appropriately trained
Jn Good Laboraory Practices and performing realtime PCR
+All the biomedical wsste should be disposed off in accordance with National

uidelines wayside gov inSresiten imac. West: Merapenent_ Rule, 20L6 0

 

‘©The sample should be opened only in Biosafety Cabinet Class TT A2. At the time of

ded

 

sample dispose, the Viral Transport Medium (VIM) with swabs s

 

idbe ai

 

 

ina biohazard tug containing 2% Lyzel ar 5% feshly prepared hypochlorite soluion
 

Bag should then be sealed using plastic tay ane disposed of tn accordance with
‘National gnidotines

4+ Government LD 0 support he ew

 

aaldress and contact number of the suspect

patient should be eollected at he time of sample valletion

 

4+ Before any lnberstors (private or public) stare their activities, they must ensure

 

immediattrealtinse repocting of the

TEMR HQ database

st results along with the coaast details tthe
cessible at htpssievstatus em orgin. Login eredentisls to

lta willbe given by ICMR,

 

‘each la for uplouding

 

+ Fach laboretry ill be given « registration number by ICMR. The registration
homer given hy ICMR should be prominenzly exhibited in ease any edvertisement fs
mace an aso inthe repur

+The access to specified data and analysis to stakeholiers like IDSP, MolIFW will he
provided through API fr timely initiation of eantast easing and appropriate contol

+ The request should be send of agganwaldicwu;gow.in indicating nante, contact

details and mobile aumbor of nodal conta forthe I.

Policy for sample storage and destruction:

+ AILCOVID9 positive semples will ned tbe transported to ICMRNIV, Pune under

 

suitable binsafety and biasceurey precautions as lad down by ICMR. Th

 

 

amples wil be destroyed within ope week of euleetion

+ Nosomple shouldbe shared with any other organisation for any purpose

Cast of the tote

The National Task Force recommends thar the maxsanam cost fe testing sample shonid not

 

cexcosd Rs 4500, This may include RS |,$00 asa serening test for suspect cases, and an
uditional_ Rs 3,000 for confirmation fost, However, ICMR encourages free oF subsidized

testing in this hour of National publi health emergency

These guidelines may be amended from rime ttn
Talla wo eorily with sn of the above guidelines wil result in legal setion
