Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: laboratory investigations and sample
requirements for diagnosis
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for sampling and for diagnostic laboratories
Public Health
England
1. Scope
This document describes the samples required for establishing a diagnosis of COVID-19 acute respiratory disease and
the tests that will be performed in England.
Contents
1. Scope
2. Initial steps and arranging testing for COVID-19
3. Explanation of sample sets
4. Sending samples to the testing laboratory
2. Initial steps and arranging testing for COVID-19
See the criteria for testing. If a patient meets the criteria for COVID-19 acute respiratory disease testing, please refer to
how to arrange laboratory testing. There is no need to call the health protection team (
HPT) or regional laboratory to
request testing.
More information is provided in the specific guidance onsafe sampling and handling of laboratory samplesand infection
prevention and control.
Designated Public Health England (PHE) regional laboratories, in addition to the Respiratory Virus Unit (
RVU) Reference
Laboratory at PHE Colindale, are able to carry out testing for COVID-19. Seelist of laboratories with this capability.
Samples that are positive on initial testing by the regional laboratory will be considered as presumptive positives and will
be referred to PHE Colindale for confirmatory testing. Presumptive positive results will be telephoned and contact tracing
should commence immediately.
Please note that patients who are admitted to hospital will need additional respiratory samples taken for testing for other
respiratory pathogens, such as influenza, in addition to those detailed below for COVID-19. These additional tests must be
carried out by the referring laboratory – samples must not be forwarded to the designated PHE regional laboratory who
will be carrying out the 2019-nCoV screening test.
If testing for avian influenza is also indicated (based on assessment of travel and exposure histories), specific and
separate samples will need to be collected and sent to the appropriate public health laboratory as per routine practice. For
more information, refer to PHE Avian influenza: guidance, data and analysis.
If testing for MERS-CoV is also indicated (based on assessment of travel and exposure histories), specific and separate
samples will need to be collected and sent to the relevant public health laboratory .
3. Explanation of sample sets
3.1 Samples required for initial diagnostic testing (possible case)
1. Upper respiratory tract sample(s): single swab used for throat then nose into one pot of viral transport medium; a viral
nose swab and a viral throat swab combined into one pot of viral transport medium, or a nasopharyngeal aspirate in a
universal transport pot. Bacterial or charcoal swabs are not suitable.
2. Lower respiratory tract sample (sputum) if obtainable, in universal container
Additionally, if the patient is admitted to hospital, take a sample for acute serology.
5mL serum tube or plain (no additive) tube; for children <12 years, 1mL is acceptable
Important points about sample-labelling and request forms include:
label each sample with ID, date of birth and type of sample
use the specific form for requesting COVID-19 acute respiratory disease testing (E28), one form for each sample
do not place paperwork (request forms) in the primary container for Category B transport
request form must include a contact phone number for sharing of results
samples without appropriate paperwork will not be tested or testing will be delayed
3.2 Samples required for monitoring confirmed 2019-nCoV acute respiratory disease
Sequential sampling may be required to monitor the progress of confirmed COVID-19 acute respiratory disease, decided
on a case-by-case basis. The Reference Laboratory at PHE Colindale (RVU) will advise the referring laboratory about the
frequency of sampling and which sample types need to be collected on particular days.
4. Sending samples to the testing laboratory
The referring laboratory must send the sample to the designated laboratory listed inhow to arrange laboratory testing.
There is no need to call the HPT or regional laboratory to request testing.
All samples for COVID-19 testing should be packaged and transported in accordance with Category B transportation
regulations and labelled ‘Priority 10’. UN 3373 packaging must be used for sample transport.
Further guidance is given on packaging and transport of samples insafe handling and processing for laboratories. PHE
follows the World Health Organization (WHO) guidance on regulations for the transport of infectious substances 2019-
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
2020.
If the referring laboratory needs to know whether the samples have arrived at the designated laboratory, they should
contact the courier for tracking information.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
