COVID-19: Guidelines on disinfection of common public places including offices
Scope: This document aims to provide interim guidance about the environmental cleaning
/decontamination of common public places including offices in areas reporting COVID-19.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19) is an acute respiratory disease caused by a novel
Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2), transmitted in most instances through respiratory droplets,
direct contact with cases and also through contaminated surfaces/objects. Though the virus
survives on environmental surfaces for varied period of time, it gets easily inactivated by
chemical disinfectants.
In view of the above, the following guidelines are to be followed, especially in areas
reporting COVID-19. For ease of implementation the guideline divided these areas into (i)
indoor areas, (ii) outdoor areas and (iii) public toilets.
1. Indoor areas including office spaces
Office spaces, including conference rooms should be cleaned every evening after office hours
or early in the morning before the rooms are occupied. If contact surface is visibly dirty, it
should be cleaned with soap and water prior to disinfection. Prior to cleaning, the worker
should wear disposable rubber boots, gloves (heavy duty), and a triple layer mask.
 Start cleaning from cleaner areas and proceed towards dirtier areas.
 All indoor areas such as entrance lobbies, corridors and staircases, escalators, elevators,
security guard booths, office rooms, meeting rooms, cafeteria should be mopped with a
disinfectant with 1% sodium hypochlorite or phenolic disinfectants. The guidelines for
preparing fresh 1% sodium hypochlorite solution is at Annexure I
 High contact surfaces such elevator buttons, handrails / handles and call buttons,
escalator handrails, public counters, intercom systems, equipment like telephone,
printers/scanners, and other office machines should be cleaned twice daily by mopping
with a linen/absorbable cloth soaked in 1% sodium hypochlorite.Frequently touched areas
like table tops, chair handles, pens, diary files, keyboards, mouse, mouse pad, tea/coffee
dispensing machines etc. should specially be cleaned.
 For metallic surfaces like door handles, security locks, keys etc. 70% alcohol can be used
to wipe down surfaces where the use of bleach is not suitable.
 Hand sanitizing stations should be installed in office premises (especially at the entry)
and near high contact surfaces.
 In a meeting/conference/office room, if someone is coughing, without following
respiratory etiquettes or mask, the areas around his/her seat should be vacated and cleaned
with 1% sodium hypochlorite.
 Carefully clean the equipment used in cleaning at the end of the cleaning process.
 Remove PPE, discard in a disposable PPE in yellow disposable bag and wash hands with
soap and water.
In addition, all employees should consider cleaning the work area in front of them with a
disinfecting wipe prior to use and sit one seat further away from others, if possible
2. Outdoor areas
Outdoor areas have less risk then indoor areas due to air currents and exposure to
sunlight. These include bus stops, railway platforms, parks, roads, etc. Cleaning and
disinfection efforts should be targeted to frequently touched/contaminated surfaces as already
detailed above.
3. Public toilets
Sanitary workers must use separate set of cleaning equipment for toilets (mops, nylon
scrubber) and separate set for sink and commode). They should always wear disposable
protective gloves while cleaning a toilet.
Areas Agents / Toilet cleaner Procedure
Toilet pot/
commode
Sodium hypochlorite 1%/
detergent
Soap powder / long handle
angular brush
• Inside of toilet pot/commode:
• Scrub with the recommended agents and the long
handle angular brush.
• Outside: clean with recommended agents; use a
scrubber.
Lid/
commode
Nylon scrubber and soap
powder/detergent
1% Sodium Hypochlorite
• Wet and scrub with soap powder and the nylon scrubber
inside and outside.
• Wipe with 1% Sodium Hypochlorite
Toilet floor Soap powder /detergent and
scrubbing brush/ nylon
broom
1% Sodium Hypochlorite
• Scrub floor with soap powder and the scrubbing brush
• Wash with water
• Use sodium hypochlorite1% dilution
Sink Soap powder / detergent and
nylon scrubber
1% Sodium Hypochlorite
• Scrub with the nylon scrubber.
• Wipe with 1% sodium hypochlorite
Showers
area / Taps
and fittings
Warm water Detergent
powder Nylon Scrubber 1%
Sodium Hypochlorite/ 70%
alcohol
• Thoroughly scrub the floors/tiles with warm water and
detergent
• Wipe over taps and fittings with a damp cloth and
detergent.
• Care should be taken to clean the underside of taps and
fittings.
• Wipe with 1% sodium hypochlorite/ 70% alcohol
Soap
dispensers
Detergent and water • Should be cleaned daily with detergent and water and
dried.
 70% Alcohol can be used to wipe down surfaces where the use of bleach is not suitable,
e.g. metal. (Chloroxylenol (4.5-5.5%)/ Benzalkonium Chloride or any other disinfectants
found to be effective against coronavirus may be used as per manufacturer’s instructions)
 Always use freshly prepared 1% sodium hypochlorite.
 Do not use disinfectants spray on potentially highly contaminated areas (such as toilet
bowl or surrounding surfaces) as it may create splashes which can further spread the
virus.
 To prevent cross contamination, discard cleaning material made of cloth (mop and wiping
cloth) in appropriate bags after cleaning and disinfecting. Wear new pair of gloves and
fasten the bag.
 Disinfect all cleaning equipment after use and before using in other area
 Disinfect buckets by soaking in bleach solution or rinse in hot water
4. Personal Protective Equipment (PPE): Wear appropriate PPE which would include the
following while carrying out cleaning and disinfection work.
 Wear disposable rubber boots, gloves (heavy duty), and a triple layer mask
 Gloves should be removed and discarded damaged, and a new pair worn.
 All disposable PPE should be removed and discarded after cleaning activities are
completed.
 Hands should be washed with soap and water immediately after each piece of PPE is
removed, following completion of cleaning. (Refer to Annexure II: Steps of Hand
Hygiene)
Masks are effective if worn according to instructions and properly fitted. Masks should be
discarded and changed if they become physically damaged or soaked. (Annexure-III:
Guidelines for use of mask)
Annexure-I
Guidelines for Preparation of 1% sodium hypochlorite solution
Product Available chlorine 1percent
Sodium hypochlorite – liquid bleach 3.5% 1 part bleach to 2.5 parts water
Sodium hypochlorite – liquid 5% 1 part bleach to 4 parts water
NaDCC (sodium dichloro-
isocyanurate) powder
60% 17 grams to 1 litre water
NaDCC (1.5 g/ tablet) – tablets 60% 11 tablets to 1 litre water
Chloramine – powder 25% 80 g to 1 litre water
Bleaching powder 70% 7g g to 1 litre water
Any other As per manufacturer’s Instructions
Annexure II
Steps of Hand Hygiene
Annexure III
Guidelines for use of mask
The correct procedure of wearing triple layer surgical mask
1. Perform hand hygiene
2. Unfold the pleats; make sure that they are facing down.
3. Place over nose, mouth and chin.
4. Fit flexible nose piece over nose bridge.
5. Secure with tie strings (upper string to be tied on top of head above the ears –lower string
at the back of the neck.)
6. Ensure there are no gaps on either side of the mask, adjust to fit.
7. Do not let the mask hanging from the neck.
8. Change the mask after six hours or as soon as they become wet.
9. Disposable masks are never to be reused and should be disposed off.
10. While removing the mask great care must be taken not to touch the potentially infected
outer surface of the mask
11. To remove mask first untie the string below and then the string above and handle the
mask using the upper strings.
12. Disposal of used masks: Used mask should be considered as potentially infected medical
waste. Discard the mask in a closed bin immediately after use.
