Suggested citation: European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Strategies for the surveillance of COVID-19.
Stockholm: ECDC; 2020
Stockholm, April 2020
© European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, 2020. Reproduction is authorised, provided the source is acknowledged.
TECHNICAL REPORT
Strategies for the surveillance of
COVID-19
9 April 2020
Background
All EU/EEA Member States and the United Kingdom are seeing widespread community transmission of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) and have implemented extensive public health, societal and economic measures to flatten the
epidemic curve and avert overload or collapse of their healthcare systems. This document proposes an updated
strategy for COVID-19 surveillance at national and EU/EEA level that specifically aims to reconcile the data needs
for effective pandemic response with what is still feasible in countries and within healthcare systems under siege,
while taking into account guidance issued by the World Health Organization [1,2].
Surveillance objectives
The objectives of COVID-19 surveillance at national and EU/EEA level are as follows:
 Monitor the intensity, geographic spread and severity of COVID-19 in the population in order to estimate
the burden of disease, assess the direction of recent time trends, and inform appropriate mitigation
measures.
 Monitor viral changes to inform drug and vaccine development, and to identify markers of severe infection.
 Monitor changes in which risk groups are most affected in order to better target prevention efforts.
 Monitor the epidemic’s impact on the healthcare system to predict the trajectory of the epidemic curve and
inform resource allocation and mobilisation of surge capacity as well as external emergency support.
 Monitor the impact of any mitigation measures to inform authorities so they can adjust the choice of
measures, as well as their timing and intensity.
Additional objectives at national level are as follows:
 Detect and contain nosocomial outbreaks to protect healthcare workers and patients.
 Detect and contain outbreaks in long-term care facilities and other closed communities to protect those
most at risk of severe disease and poor outcomes.
TECHNICAL REPORT Strategies for the surveillance of COVID-19
2
Routine surveillance systems
Objective 1. Intensity, geographic spread, severity
Intensity
Comprehensive surveillance. In countries comprehensively testing suspected cases for COVID-19, the most
accurate indicators of intensity will be the absolute number of newly confirmed cases and their notification rate per
100 000 population. They provide a solid basis for monitoring trends over time and for intra-country (probably to a
lesser extent: inter-country) comparison. Countries only testing severe cases for COVID-19 could use the number
and notification rate of severe cases as a proxy of intensity for trend monitoring, taking into account changes in
testing policy over time.
Sentinel syndromic surveillance. Countries no longer testing mild suspected cases for COVID-19, but still
encouraging such cases to consult their primary healthcare providers (including telephone consultations), should
integrate COVID-19 surveillance with sentinel surveillance of influenza-like illness (ILI) or acute respiratory
infection (ARI), which is in place in most EU/EEA Member States. The naso-pharyngeal swabs obtained by sentinel
physicians from a systematic sample of patients presenting with ILI/ARI should also be tested for severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in addition to influenza virus and other respiratory viruses. In
countries where sentinel physicians are not able to swab their patients, other approaches can be considered, such
as self-swabbing and shipping of specimens using dedicated channels. The intensity of COVID-19 could then be
derived from the weekly number of positive specimens over specimens tested and/or the weekly number of
confirmed cases over the number of ILI/ARI consultations. In countries/areas where the proportion of positive
sentinel specimens is high, the incidence of ARI/ILI over time is a good proxy of the incidence of COVID-19. The
denominator for calculating incidences is the number of individuals registered with the sentinel physicians, or the
population under their catchment area, or the total number of consultations per week. Where feasible, these
sentinel surveillance systems should be expanded to include more physicians and thus improve their population
coverage. In all countries, these systems would need to be maintained beyond the end of the influenza
surveillance season in week 20 because surveillance of COVID-19 would need to continue.
Helplines, surveys, participatory surveillance. Countries not systematically testing most suspected cases
while limiting physical access to primary healthcare (for example by encouraging people to call specific COVID-19
helplines, or when people are placed in in lockdown) should consider analysing data from alternative sources.
These could include phone consultations of sentinel physicians, calls to regional/national healthcare telephone
helplines, consultations of online healthcare apps or self-assessment tools for advice on COVID-19 testing, or
population-based participatory syndromic surveillance schemes for influenza that exist in a number of Member
States. Resources permitting, countries can also conduct their own regular telephone surveys. Numbers of ILI/ARI
over the respective denominator in each of these approaches would offer at least a rough indication of the
intensity of mild respiratory symptoms compatible with COVID-19, especially outside the influenza season.
Geographic spread
Comprehensive or sentinel syndromic surveillance. In countries comprehensively testing suspected cases for
COVID-19, any first confirmed case with no known epidemiological link in a region signifies spread to this region.
With decreasing certainty, geographic spread could also be inferred from sentinel syndromic surveillance or any of
the alternative data sources described for intensity. Unlike intensity, however, geographic spread requires
categorisation, for example based on the proportion of affected subnational jurisdictions, to be meaningful at
national and EU/EEA level.
Severity
Comprehensive surveillance. Countries comprehensively testing suspected cases for COVID-19 should monitor
the number and proportion of hospitalised cases, cases admitted to intensive care units (ICU) or high-dependency
units (HDU), and cases with fatal outcome among the number of confirmed cases.
Hospital-based SARI surveillance. Countries no longer testing mild suspected cases for COVID-19 should at
least test all severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) cases admitted to hospital and ICU/HDU, and monitor the
proportion of confirmed COVID-19 cases among all SARI. This type of surveillance system can be comprehensive
or based on a number of representative sentinel hospitals or areas. Sentinel hospitals should be selected if their
catchment population is known and stable. A suitable alternative is to select all hospitals in a given area/region and
use the population of that area/region as denominator.
Mortality surveillance. While the surveillance of fatal outcome among hospitalised confirmed COVID-19 cases
remains important and will be relatively feasible, it may not reflect the true magnitude of COVID-19-related
TECHNICAL REPORT Strategies for the surveillance of COVID-19
3
mortality in a population. Elderly people may die outside of hospital settings, e.g. in long-term care facilities
(LTCF), as already observed in a number of Member States. Specific LTCF-based surveillance data, or mortality
data from national statistics offices may be considered if frequently updated and readily available. Alternatively,
EuroMOMO supplies weekly age-specific all-cause excess mortality data for the majority of Member States.
Qualitative indicators: In the context of influenza pandemics, WHO has suggested a set of qualitative indicators
to assess severity (pandemic influenza severity assessment, PISA) which might also lend themselves to COVID-19
[3]. In the PISA framework, severity is composed of transmissibility, seriousness and impact. Transmissibility
can be measured, for example through the indicators obtained from sentinel ILI/ARI surveillance while seriousness
and impact derive, for example, from indicators obtained from SARI surveillance, mortality surveillance or COVID-
19-related bed occupancy in hospitals. According to agreed definitions, transmissibility, seriousness and impact are
reported as qualitative categories (e.g. no activity, low, moderate, high, extraordinary) and may support public
health decisions which would need to be taken in the context of large pressures on health services.
Objective 2. Virological surveillance
Virological sentinel surveillance of COVID-19 should be based on the clinical specimens obtained through
national sentinel surveillance of ILI/ARI/SARI. The recommended diagnostic test uses nucleic acid amplification,
such as RT-PCR, to detect SARS-CoV-2 RNA in oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal swabs [2]1
. Furthermore,
integrated epidemiological and virological surveillance will play a significant role – once vaccines and antivirals
become available – to monitor virus/vaccine match and the possible emergence of antiviral resistance.
Representative stains of virus from different geographic locations and time points, as well as from patients of both
genders, and across the age and severity spectrum should be selected for sequencing in order to monitor virus
evolution and changes in the virus genome. Particular attention should be paid to any changes reducing the
sensitivity of detection assays and mutations in surface proteins that may affect the antigenicity of circulating
viruses. Any RT-PCR with a Ct value less than 30 is considered a good source of sequencing material. Countries
without sequencing capacity are encouraged to send samples to WHO referral laboratories for COVID-19 testing,
following WHO guidance for laboratories shipping specimens or request sequencing support from ECDC (email to
influenza@ecdc.europa.eu). Further details are available on the ECDC laboratory support webpage. Sequencing
results should be deposited in the Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) database.
Laboratories involved in the COVID-19 national response are encouraged to participate in the ECDC and WHO
external quality assessments to evaluate the reliability of their testing assays and resulting data quality.
As per WHO biosafety guideline, non-propagative diagnostic laboratory work (for example, sequencing, nucleic acid
amplification) should be conducted at a facility using procedures equivalent to biosafety level 2 (BSL-2).
Propagative work (for example, virus culture, isolation or neutralisation assays) should be conducted at a
containment laboratory with inward directional airflow (BSL-3). Patient specimens from suspected or confirmed
cases should be transported as UN3373, ‘biological substance category B’. Viral cultures or isolates should be
transported as category A, UN2814, ‘infectious substance, affecting humans’ [2].
Objective 3. Changes in risk groups
Enhanced surveillance of hospitalised cases. Risk groups should be identified and monitored by enhanced
comprehensive or sentinel surveillance of hospitalised cases of COVID-19 with a focus on patient age, gender,
medication, underlying conditions, smoking and healthcare worker status, as well as ICU/HDU admission and
clinical outcome. Regular descriptive and multivariable analysis should inform targeted preventative measures and
messages.
1
Various other commercial assays (molecular point-of-care tests, SARS-CoV-2 rapid antigen detection and antibody detection
tests) are available or under development. Although some of these tests have a CE/IVD mark, clinical validation of their
diagnostic performance under real-life conditions is pending. These assays should be carried out in a sufficiently large number of
target population subjects and compared with a gold standard test before introducing them into the routine. ECDC is working in
close cooperation with the European Commission, Member State authorities, the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics
(FIND) (https://www.finddx.org/) and WHO on the validation of these tests.
TECHNICAL REPORT Strategies for the surveillance of COVID-19
4
Objective 4. Impact on healthcare system
Operational healthcare system data. Possible quantitative indicators to monitor the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on national healthcare systems are:
 the number of confirmed cases and deaths among healthcare workers and their proportion among
healthcare workers overall and among those working in dedicated COVID-19 hospitals/treatment centres;
 sick-leave numbers among healthcare workers overall and in dedicated centres;
 the COVID-19-related bed occupancy in hospitals overall, dedicated centres, ICUs and HDUs, beds with
ventilators;
 the mean number of days’ worth of personal protective equipment left before depletion of stock; and
 the proportion of long-term care facilities with at last one case of COVID-19 among staff or residents or
with increased mortality.
A possible qualitative indicator is whether healthcare systems, at regional or national levels, are still largely
coping. In reality, the definition of this qualitative indicator would probably be at least vaguely based on
operational healthcare system data (see above).
Objective 5. Impact of mitigation measures
Escalation and maintenance of mitigation measures
Intensity, geographic spread, impact on healthcare system. While escalating and maintaining mitigation
measures, their effectiveness should be assessed at regular short intervals to ensure the desired reduction or
interruption of COVID-19 transmission in the population. This is best accomplished by monitoring intensity,
geographic spread, and the impact on the healthcare system. At this stage, perhaps more than any other, it is
imperative to frequently, publicly and comprehensibly communicate and explain the latest figures if the population
are to accept and comply with the chosen mitigation measures over an extended period of time.
Data from contact tracing, especially changing transmission patterns, can also be analysed to assess the
effectiveness of mitigation measures. Such data may include number of contacts, type of contacts most affected,
or common settings of transmission and may ultimately inform de-escalation planning.
De-escalation of mitigation measures
De-escalation of mitigation should be considered as soon as intensity, severity and healthcare system impact
indicators justify the conclusion that the incidence of COVID-19 has decreased to a level where systematic case
finding and isolation, contact tracing and quarantine are sufficient to control, and ultimately contain, the pandemic
within a country.
If de-escalation of mitigation measures leads to an increase of COVID-19 cases, requiring fast re-escalation,
surveillance and monitoring needs will not differ from the initial escalation phase. If de-escalation results in
(seemingly) nationwide lasting absence of COVID-19 cases, the surveillance systems and indicators informing the
escalation phase might be too crude to detect persisting low-level community transmission. The following elements
could alleviate this:
 Temporarily enhanced sentinel ILI/ARI surveillance at regional or national level: for a limited period
of time, such as two weeks, the number of sentinel physicians could be increased, each of them sampling a
higher-than-usual proportion of ARI/ILI cases for COVID-19 testing.
 Telephone helplines: calls to regional/national healthcare telephone helplines could be used to sample a
proportion of cases meeting the ILI/ARI case definition for COVID-19 testing.
 Population-based seroprevalence studies could provide valuable additional information regarding age-
specific population immunity against COVID-19 in the different phases of the pandemic at the
local/regional/national level. In addition, prevalence studies using RT-PCR can provide information on the
extent of community transmission.
 Contact tracing following each detected case is crucial during de-escalation to ensure containment. Data
from contact tracing will help understand transmission patterns and guide further action.
Objectives 6 and 7. Detection of nosocomial outbreaks and
outbreaks in long-term care facilities
Routine surveillance of outbreaks. Nosocomial outbreaks of COVID-19 and outbreaks in long-term care
facilities should be notifiable to local public health authorities within 24 hours of detection. Given the potential dire
consequences, the threshold for testing should be low. The rationale would be to rapidly contain the event,
TECHNICAL REPORT Strategies for the surveillance of COVID-19
5
improving infection prevention and control measures and tracing contacts, protecting healthcare workers and
patients/residents at high risk of severe disease and poor outcome, and preserving vital healthcare infrastructure.
At national level, the number of such outbreaks of COVID-19 and the proportion of affected facilities might serve
as additional indicators of intensity, geographic spread and impact on the healthcare system.
Minimum reporting to ECDC
ECDC appreciates the enormous efforts of some Member States to report detailed data for each confirmed case of
COVID-19. Many Member States, however, can no longer keep up with the reporting and their reporting burden
should be eased. To reduce the reporting burden, Member States should, as a minimum, once per week report a
basic aggregate dataset on all cases, a reduced case-based dataset on all severe cases, viral sequence data to
GISAID, qualitative indicators for geographic spread, and qualitative indicators for pandemic impact on the
healthcare system. A detailed description can be found in the COVID-19 reporting protocol. If no cases of COVID-
19 are detected, e.g. after de-escalating mitigation measures, zero reporting is expected. Table 1 shows how each
indicator relates to the relevant surveillance objective.
ECDC and WHO will use these data to compile and publish a weekly COVID-19 report.
Table 1. Minimum COVID-19 surveillance data to be reported to ECDC/GISAID
Objective
Indicator
Quantitative/
qualitative
Numerator Denominator Format Database Frequency
1 Intensity
Quantitative
Total confirmed
(n)
Total tested (n) Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Intensity
Quantitative
Confirmed
cases by age
(n)
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Intensity
Quantitative
Positive ILI/ARI
total (n)
ILI/ARI total
tested (n)
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Intensity
Quantitative Total ILI/ARI
Individuals
registered with
the sentinel
physicians (n)
OR
population under
sentinel physician
catchment area
OR
total number of
consultations per
week
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Geogr. spread Qualitative TESSy Weekly
Severity
Quantitative
Total
hospitalised (n)
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Severity
Quantitative
Total ICU /HDU
(n)
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Severity
Quantitative
Total SARI
positive (n)
Total SARI tested
(n)
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Severity
Quantitative
Positive SARI by
age (n)
SARI tested, by
age (n)
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Severity
Quantitative
Positive SARI by
age (n)
Hospital
catchment area
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Severity
Quantitative
Total confirmed
deaths (n)
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
Severity
Quantitative
Confirmed
deaths by age
(n)
Confirmed cases
by age (n)
Aggregate TESSy Weekly
TECHNICAL REPORT Strategies for the surveillance of COVID-19
6
Objective
Indicator
Quantitative/
qualitative
Numerator Denominator Format Database Frequency
2 Viral changes
Quantitative
Genetic
mutations
Sequence-based GISAID Weekly
3 Risk groups Quantitative Case-based TESSy Weekly
4 Impact on
healthcare
system
Qualitative TESSy Weekly
In addition, ECDC and WHO are piloting the PISA indicators: transmissibility, severity and impact (Table 2).
Table 2. PISA indicators currently piloted
Objective
Indicator
Quantitative/ qualitative Numerator Denominator Format Database Frequency
1 Transmissibility Qualitative TESSy Weekly
Seriousness Qualitative TESSy Weekly
Impact Qualitative TESSy Weekly
Testing priorities in case of limited resources
In situations where testing capacities are available and primary care services are accessible, all patients presenting
to the healthcare system with symptoms of acute respiratory infection should be considered suspected cases of
COVID-19 according to the EU case definition and should be tested for SARS-CoV-2 virus as part of active case
finding. If the number of suspected cases exceeds the available testing capacity in a country or an area, testing of
the following groups should be considered a priority (in decreasing order of importance):
 Healthcare workers visiting patients (regardless of setting) in order to:
 reduce the risk of transmission to their patients;
 reduce the impact on the healthcare workforce.
 Elderly people and those with underlying chronic medical conditions such as lung disease, cancer, heart
failure, cerebrovascular disease, renal disease, liver disease, hypertension, diabetes, and
immunocompromising conditions who show signs of acute respiratory illness, because they may need
respiratory support sooner than people who are not in a risk group.
 Hospitalised patients with SARI in order to inform appropriate clinical management, including isolation and
wearing of PPE, as well as for surveillance purposes.
 All cases, even those with mild symptoms, developing acute respiratory infection in hospitals, long-term
care facilities or other vulnerable communities (or, as a minimum, the first cases to confirm an outbreak in a
closed setting) in order to guide:
 infection control and PPE use and protect vulnerable persons and healthcare workers;
 isolation and early treatment to prevent severe disease and fatal outcome in risk groups;
 decisions on healthcare workers’ exclusion from, and return to, work to ensure continued health and
social care services.
 subsets of patients with ARI or ILI in sentinel outpatient settings.
Further information on laboratory testing guidelines is available from the ECDC webpage on laboratory support for
COVID-19 in the EU/EEA and WHO documents [4].
Additional data sources
ECDC is liaising with major clinical networks and EU-Commission-funded projects (Recover, I-MOVE+, ISARIC) to
explore ways of collaborating and data sharing.
ECDC is also looking into alternative data sources for surveillance such as online self-assessment tools and
healthcare apps including ways in which ECDC can help collate information from such tools.
TECHNICAL REPORT Strategies for the surveillance of COVID-19
7
References
1. World Health Organization. Operational considerations for COVID-19 surveillance using GISRS: interim
guidance, 26 March 2020. Geneva: WHO; 2020. Available from:
https://extranet.who.int/iris/restricted/handle/10665/331589.
2. World Health Organization. Global surveillance for COVID-19 caused by human infection with COVID-19
virus: interim guidance, 20 March 2020. Geneva: WHO; 2020. Available from:
https://extranet.who.int/iris/restricted/handle/10665/331506.
3. World Health Organization. Pandemic Influenza Severity Assessment (PISA): A WHO guide to assess the
severity of influenza epidemics and pandemics. Geneva: WHO; 2017. Available from:
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/259392/WHO-WHE-IHM-GIP-2017.2-
eng.pdf;jsessionid=614D77C9474EFF4ECBE33EE0886261D8?sequence=1.
4. World Health Organization. Laboratory testing for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in suspected
human cases: Interim guidance, 19 March 2020. Geneva: WHO; 2020. Available from:
https://www.who.int/publications-detail/laboratory-testing-for-2019-novel-coronavirus-in-suspected-
human-cases-20200117.
