© European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Stockholm, 2020.
-
April 2020
Coronavirus disease - 2019 (COVID-19) and
supply of substances of human origin in
EU/EEA - first update
Scope of the document
This first update of the original document is prompted by the recent scientific developments and evolution of the
coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic and the need to include types of substances of human origin (SoHO) that
were not addressed in the first version (e.g. reproductive and some non-reproductive tissues and cells). The
document aims to provide a risk assessment and management options for the safe and sustainable supply of SoHO
to assist the European Union and European Economic Area (EU/EEA) Member States in responding to the threat
posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. Following the rapid spread of COVID-19 in the EU/EEA and worldwide, the
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has been publishing rapid risk assessments and
setting out measures on how to maintain the safety and sustainability of SoHO supply [1-4]. These documents
have also advocated the activation of pandemic plans to prepare for large outbreaks and community transmission
of COVID-19. The first version of this document and the current update also consider the current evidence
available on other viral respiratory pathogens, mainly the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (SARS-
CoV), the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and seasonal or pandemic influenza
viruses [5]. ECDC will update the document as and when new relevant information becomes available, or as
required by the epidemiological situation.
Target institutions
National competent authorities for SoHO, blood and tissue establishments, organ and tissue procurement
organisations and transplant centres in the EU/EEA.
Definitions
Substances of human origin (SoHO) include human blood, blood components, tissues, reproductive and non-
reproductive cells and organs, as defined in EU/EEA Directives [6-8], and all of these substances when they are
used as starting materials for the manufacture of medicinal products. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic
emergency and for this document, the following prioritisation is applied:
• blood and blood components, organs and haematopoietic stem cells are considered to be ‘critical SoHO’, as
there are usually no alternative therapies, they are often life-saving and there are limited possibilities for
storage;
• plasma for the manufacturing of medicinal products and tissues for life-saving transplantation (e.g. heart
valves, skin, etc. in some cases) are considered to be ‘essential SoHO’, as they can be stored; and
• other types of cells and tissues used to enhance the quality of life are considered to be ‘common SoHO’.
To safeguard public health and to prevent the transmission of infectious diseases, all precautionary measures
possible need to be taken in order to maintain the supply of safe and high-quality SoHO.
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
2
In this document, the term ‘SoHO establishment’ refers to blood and tissue establishments, organ, tissue and cell
procurement organisations and transplant centres, as defined in the EU/EEA directives [6-8].
Background
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) emerged in December 2019 in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province, China.
This highly contagious disease is currently spreading across the world and throughout EU/EEA Member States, with
a daily increase in the number of affected countries, confirmed cases and infection-related deaths. Updated data
are published daily on the ECDC and World Health Organization (WHO) websites [9,10].
On 30 January 2020, WHO declared that the outbreak of COVID-19 constituted a Public Health Emergency of
International Concern (PHEIC) [11]. On 11 March 2020, based on the high levels of global spread and the severity
of COVID-19, WHO’s Director-General declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic [12].
COVID-19 is an acute respiratory disease caused by a newly emerged zoonotic coronavirus. A positive-sense
enveloped single-stranded RNA virus, named Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2),
was isolated from a patient with pneumonia and connected to the cluster of acute respiratory illness cases from
Wuhan. Genetic analysis has revealed that it is closely related to SARS-CoV and genetically clusters within the
genus Betacoronavirus, subgenus Sarbecovirus [13].
Detailed information about the virus, disease epidemiology, COVID-19 case definition for EU surveillance, clinical
manifestations and risk and prevention in the population is available on ECDC’s website [9,14] and is regularly
updated in ECDC’s rapid risk assessment [15].
Laboratory testing
The recommended diagnostic test method for SARS-CoV-2 infection is viral RNA detection with nucleic acid
amplification tests (NAT), such as a real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) [16].
Testing specimens to be collected from symptomatic patients and contacts are listed in WHO’s laboratory guidance
[16]. When necessary, results can be confirmed by genome sequencing. The European Commission working
document on the current performance of COVID-19 test methods and devices and proposed performance criteria
recommend using RT-PCR tests that follow one of the WHO protocols [20]. Although the project group working on
the document has identified 78 CE-marked RNA detection tests for which manufacturers have claimed good
performance, WHO has only shortlisted three molecular detection assays through the Emergency Use Listing
Procedure (EUL) and the Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND) has provided validation results for
another five assays [18,19]. The project group concluded that 13 antigen detection tests are CE-marked but that
information on their performance in scientific literature is scarce. In addition, the group identified 101 CE-marked
SARS-CoV-2 antibody tests for which good sensitivity and specificity are claimed by manufacturers although this is
not validated by third parties. Once validated, commercial antibody tests will be essential for assessing the
seroepidemiological profile of a population and the immune status of first-line responders or healthcare personnel,
and for guiding infection prevention and control (IPC) measures. Preliminary reports on the use of enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assays (ELISA) have shown a good correlation of antibody titration results with virus-neutralising
antibodies [21,22]. In general, specimen handling for molecular testing requires BSL-2 or equivalent facilities.
Attempts to culture the virus require BSL-3 facilities as a minimum. Laboratories performing diagnostic testing for
COVID-19 should follow national guidelines on laboratory biosafety which need to comply with WHO biosafety
guidance for COVID-19 [23]. Laboratory testing data are regularly updated in ECDC’s rapid risk assessments [15].
Immunity
Current data show that IgM and IgG antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 develop between 6–15 days after disease onset
[21,24-28]. However, we do not know whether the detected antibodies indicate that the person has acquired
protective immunity against the disease, or how long this immunity will last. Longitudinal serological studies that
follow patients’ immunity over an extended period will provide the relevant information.
Prophylaxis and treatment options
While several potential COVID-19 vaccines are under development, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) expects
that it may take at least one year before a vaccine is approved and available for widespread use [29].
Medical treatment for COVID-19 is symptomatic. Moderate to severely ill patients require supportive care and
sometimes oxygen supplementation. At present, no medicine has demonstrated itself to be effective in the
treatment of COVID-19. Pharmaceuticals are undergoing clinical trials to assess their safety and efficacy as
potential treatments for COVID-19 and include the antiviral nucleotide analogue remdesivir; systemic interferons
(in particular interferon β-1a); the antiviral combination lopinavir/ritonavir; the antimalarial
chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine and monoclonal antibodies against components of the immune system such as
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-4 [29]. The potential treatments must be carefully assessed in randomised controlled
trials (RCTs). EMA has published recommendations on compassionate use of the investigational antiviral agent
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
3
remdesivir [30] and on clinical trials or emergency programmes for the use of chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine
[31]. Systemic use of steroids for COVID-19 pneumonia is not recommended because they might increase the viral
replication and shedding of the virus, along with other steroid-related side effects [32].
Convalescent plasma (plasma of patients recovered from COVID-19 which contains specific anti-SARS-CoV-2
antibodies) is under investigation for the treatment of patients with COVID-19. Despite some study limitations, the
improved outcomes in recipients of convalescent plasma obtained in two recent small studies in China [33,34]
support investigating this therapy further in adequately designed clinical trials. Blood services and academic
hospitals in several EU countries and the USA [35,36] have reported activities for collection and transfusion of
convalescent plasma [37]. The EU Commission, in cooperation with ECDC, national competent authorities for blood
safety and national blood establishments, has published an EU programme of COVID-19 convalescent plasma
collection and supply [36]. It aims to launch a coordinated and effective approach to the collection of convalescent
plasma across the EU, supporting the possible treatment of seriously ill patients within observational studies or
randomised clinical trials and case-controls studies and, in the longer term, the development of immune globulin
concentrates by industry. The programme includes the development and hosting of a database to monitor
convalescent plasma donation and use. The database will be developed and hosted by the European Commission
(DG DIGIT), in compliance with Regulations 2016/679 and 2018/17/25 and will be designed in collaboration with
the European Blood Alliance (EBA).
COVID-19 pandemic and SoHO
Maintaining a safe, sufficient and accessible SoHO supply during a pandemic is vital for public health. It is therefore
critical that SoHO establishments recognise the potential impact of the pandemic on the safe and sufficient supply
of SoHO and adequately respond to ensure the maintenance of core services.
In assessing the risk posed by the COVID-19 pandemic to SoHO supply, it is necessary to consider the extent of
geographical spread, level of community circulation and local epidemiology of COVID-19 in parallel with the given
public health response and healthcare system capacities of the country in question [38]. Taking into account the
above-mentioned considerations, we identified the following risks to SoHO posed by the COVID-19 pandemic:
• risk to the viral safety of SoHO
• risk to SoHO recipients
• risk to staff in SoHO establishments,
• risk affecting sufficiency and sustainability of SoHO supply.
Risk to the viral safety of SoHO
Although SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted from human to human via respiratory droplets, the potential presence of the
virus in the blood and bodily fluids, cells, tissues and organs may be considered a threat to the viral safety of
SoHO.
Blood and blood components
Respiratory viruses generally attach to receptors in the airways (except adenoviruses [39]) and therefore the
feasibility of blood-borne transmission of respiratory viruses is unknown. Furthermore, the cell-entry molecules for
SARS-CoV-2, the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (hACE 2) receptors, are not detected in red blood cells,
and are absent or present in very limited amounts in immunocytes and lymphatic cells [40]. This implies that
SARS-COV-2 infection of blood cells is unlikely.
Limited data have shown low levels of viral RNA detected in plasma or serum from some COVID-19 symptomatic
patients. SARS-CoV-2 RNA was detected in six of 41 patients (15%) [41] and one of six patients (15%) in China
but only in one of 12 patients (8%) in the study from Singapore [42]. Another study from China, on PCR laboratory
testing of different types of clinical specimens from COVID-19 patients, reported only three PCR positive samples
(1%) out of 307 blood samples [43]. The results of PCR testing of serum samples in six viraemic patients suggest a
very low viral load in specimens [41]. Viral RNA has also been detected in the urine of symptomatic patients [44].
Cases of asymptomatic COVID-19 have been reported [39-42], although their proportion among all infected
persons remains unknown. Pre-symptomatic transmission may occur 1–3 days before the source patient develops
symptoms [47].
Four SARS-CoV-2 RNA-positive blood donations from asymptomatic donors were detected during a routine and
retrospective laboratory screening in Wuhan Blood Centre, China [45]. While two donors were asymptomatic at the
time and after donation, another two developed symptoms after donation. One of the donations was discarded.
The transfusion history of the other three donations is missing. At the time of donation, donors tested negative for
specific IgG and IgM against SARS-CoV-2 by ELISA. Since the RNA-positive results have not been confirmed by
another reliable PCR test, or tested for the presence of infectious SARS-CoV-2 virions, it is unclear whether this
occurrence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA-positive donations from asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic blood donors also
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
4
implies the possibility of COVID-19 transmission via transfusion. Data from Germany on a small sample of patients
showed that no SARS-CoV-2 genome could be detected in the blood of asymptomatic patients or patients with less
pronounced symptoms. Virus genome was only found in the serum of a seriously ill patient. Therefore, the authors
concluded that the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission through blood components in asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2
infected individuals seems negligible, but further studies are needed [46].
As of the time of this update, cases of transfusion-transmitted COVID-19 or other respiratory viruses (including
SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV and other coronaviruses) have not been reported.
Cells and tissues
The risk assessment of COVID-19 transmission through cells and tissues is based on the possible presence of the
virus in particular cells, the distribution of such infected cells in the tissues and organs, and possible viraemia of
vascularised tissues.
The absence of hACE2 receptors in immune cells in all haemato‐lymphoid organs suggests that direct viral infection
of haematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and cord blood is unlikely [41]. However, since SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been
detected in blood [41-43,45] and there are uncertainties about the vertical transmission of COVID-19 from mother
to child, the risk of the SARS-CoV-2 being present in HSC and cord blood donated by infected asymptomatic donors
cannot be excluded.
The presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been detected and the virus isolated in tears and conjunctival secretions of
patients with COVID-19 [47-49]. In a study from China, one-third of 38 COVID-19 patients had conjunctivitis,
including conjunctival hyperaemia, chemosis, epiphora, or increased secretions. However, only two of the patients
with conjunctivitis were positive for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA from both conjunctival and nasopharyngeal
swabs [48]. This indicates the possibility of ocular transmission of the disease through contact with infected
secretions or transplantation of ocular tissues donated by an infected donor. Corneal transplants are usually
disinfected with PVP iodine (before removal and often before preparation of the tissue bank) and then stored in
organ culture at ~ 30−37° degrees for at least 14 days [50]. The presence of viruses capable of reproduction after
this procedure seems very unlikely. These data and the absence of known ocular transmission cases indicate that
the risk of COVID-19 cases entering the eye donor pool and subsequent transmission is theoretical.
As of the time of this update, there were no reports of sexual transmission of COVID-19. No published evidence
supports the presence or transmission of SARS-CoV-2 via sperm or oocytes. It is assumed that the virus cannot infect
gametes because they lack hACE2 receptors, the cell-entry points for the virus. These receptors are expressed only in
the testicular Leydig and Sertoli cells [51,52] and in ovary cells [53]. Whether hACE2 is present in spermatozoids and
oocytes is unclear. The repeated washing steps required for the culture and freezing of gametes and embryos will
result in high dilution of any possible secondary contaminations in the IVF laboratory [54].
Clinical manifestations of COVID-19 in pregnant women range from asymptomatic to mild symptoms, sometimes
with atypical findings such as leucocytosis and higher prevalence of consolidation lesions in the computed
tomography (CT) images [55-57]. There are reports of pregnant women being admitted to ICUs [58].To our
knowledge, only two maternal deaths due to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) have been reported [59].
Overall, it seems that pregnancy and delivery do not aggravate the severity and maternal outcomes of COVID-19
pneumonia.
A recent study on 38 neonates delivered by women with COVID-19 showed no SARS-CoV-2 infection in the
neonates; even though some of the neonates had perinatal complications with SARS-CoV-2 positive placenta
[60,61] . Reports of perinatal transmission of COIVID-19 are emerging [62-64]. Although neonatal cases of COVID-
19 have been confirmed [64-66] and IgM and IgG antibodies against the virus have been detected in three new-
borns [67,68], more evidence is necessary to support the possibility of vertical transmission of COVID-19 infection
from mother to child [62,69].
Organs
The organs that have a high expression of hACE2 receptors are the lungs, heart and kidneys [70-73]. High hACE2
expression was identified in type II alveolar cells (AT2) of lung [74,75], oesophagus upper and stratified epithelial
cells, absorptive enterocytes from ileum and colon [75], cholangiocytes [76], myocardial cells, kidney proximal
tubule cells, and bladder urothelial cells [70]. These findings indicate that organs with high hACE2-expressing cells
should be considered as a potentially high risk for SARS-CoV-2 infection [70]. Nevertheless, donor-derived COVID-
19 in solid organ transplant recipients has not been reported.
Based on current knowledge of hACE2 distribution in human cells, the absence of evidence for infectivity of SARS-
CoV-2 RNA detectable in blood or serum and a lack of reports of transfusion and transplantation-transmitted cases,
the risk of COVID-19 transmission through SoHO appears to remain theoretical. Routine donor screening should
prevent individuals with clinically manifest respiratory infections, including COVID-19, from donating SoHO.
However, uncertainties surrounding viraemia during the incubation period, during an asymptomatic course of
infection, or after symptom resolution continues to be of concern in relation to the viral safety of SoHO.
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
5
Risk to SoHO recipients
During a pandemic, SoHO recipients are at increased risk of being infected and developing severe illness after
exposure to the virus in the community or hospitals. Donor-derived COVID-19 in transplanted or transfused
patients has not been reported yet. Immunosuppression after transplantation renders transplant recipients
susceptible to viral infections including SARS-CoV-2. Post-transplant COVID-19 with severe clinical symptoms and
occasional fatalities has been described in kidney [77-83], liver [84-86] or haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) [77]
transplant recipients. Preliminary data collected by the European Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation
(EBMT) among 34 allogeneic and 10 autologous HSC transplant patients show that early mortality (at about two
weeks after diagnosis) was approximately 20% in allogeneic HSC transplant recipients and 10% in autologous HSC
transplant recipients (Webinar EBMT-ASTCT 15 April 2020). Deaths have previously been reported in a liver
transplant recipient with SARS-CoV infection and two renal transplant recipients with MERS-CoV infection [87,88].
A SARS case has been reported in a recipient of an allogeneic bone marrow transplant for acute myeloid leukaemia
[89]. Due to immunosuppression, transplant recipients may have increased and prolonged shedding of virus, thus
potentially increasing the risk of transmission to contacts, including healthcare workers [87]. Solid-organ transplant
recipients may present atypical COVID-19 symptoms, starting with gastrointestinal signs and fever, which then
progresses to respiratory symptoms [90]. Current data show that organ and HSC transplant recipients are a high-
risk population for infection with SARS-CoV-2 that may affect their morbidity and mortality. The risk of non-
immunosuppressed recipients of blood, cell and tissues seems to be same as for other patients in hospital care.
The management of COVID-19 in the post-transplant setting presents complex challenges, emphasising the
importance of strict prevention strategies. In these high-risk populations, protocols for screening for SARS-CoV-2
may need to be re-evaluated.
Risk to staff in SoHO establishments
In SoHO establishments, organ procurement organisations and transplant centres, employees may be exposed to
SARS-CoV-2 via close contact with other staff members, touching contaminated surfaces, and during the
donation/transplant process through contacts with living donors, deceased donors and potential recipients (and
their relatives), and with their bodily fluids. Transmission in the working environment is a well-recognised route
and the risk of infection depends on the nature of the work and the proximity of contacts [91]. Occasionally, an
infectious donor who is asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic, or has very mild symptoms may be accepted for donation.
During the donation process, such a donor can infect attending staff or other donors in the waiting rooms of blood
donation facilities. The respiratory route of transmission from a donor to a member of staff is more likely than
through parenteral routes (including phlebotomy during blood donation). At the time of writing this update, SoHO
establishments have not reported any such cases. Although it seems that that such a route of transmission is not
very likely, responsible management and employees should not neglect these risks.
Risk to sufficiency and sustainability of SoHO supply
The nature of COVID-19 transmission, the extensive spread and experience from previous outbreaks of other
respiratory viruses, including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV [92-94], indicate that the COVID-19 pandemic may pose a
significant risk to maintaining a sufficient and sustainable supply of SoHO. COVID-19 may affect both donor and
recipient populations, SoHO establishment staff and demand or supply of SoHO, and critical materials and
equipment. Blood supply is particularly vulnerable as it requires daily frequent blood donations, and labile blood
components have limited storage time and are generally irreplaceable. Due to the inherent complexity and
individualised donor/recipient approach, the transplantation of solid organs and HSC is also sensitive to the impact
of the pandemic on the organisation, coordination and control of all crucial activities and services at local, regional,
national and international level. During the pandemic, a decrease in the availability of donors and staff may have
an impact on the donation of plasma for fractionation which is a precious biological resource used as a raw
material to manufacture essential, life-saving, plasma-derived medicinal products (PDMPs), including clotting
factors, albumin, and immunoglobulins. The main factors that may have an impact on the sufficiency and
sustainability of SoHO supply are listed below.
Temporary loss of donors
Living donors may be unable to donate because they have COVID-19, are in isolation, are self-isolating after
contact with a confirmed case of COVID-19 or are practising physical distancing. Other factors that may play a role
are restrictions placed on public transportation, work commitments, the need to care for family members, or a
reluctance to donate due to fear of being infected. COVID-19-specific donor selection criteria may also contribute
to the decrease of donors, although to a lesser extent. During the peak of the 2003 SARS epidemic in Singapore, a
decrease of 60% was seen in donors coming forward to donate blood [93]. Since the start of the COVID-19
pandemic, several countries across Europe have experienced a drop in the number of blood donations. So far,
there have been no reports of serious disruptions in the supply of blood or blood components in the EU/EEA
Member States. In March, the UK experienced a 15% decrease in the weekly number of blood donations at
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
6
national level [95]. Italy had a regional drop in Lombardy and other heavily affected regions. These shortages have
been largely mitigated by a drop in demand due to the cancellation of elective operations and increased/adapted
donor recruitment activities. The latest data show that there has been a decrease in the number of donors of
plasma for manufacturing medicinal products. This drop may have an impact on the supply of PDMPs later this
year. A restriction in the number of ICU beds available for both donors and transplant recipients may unfavourably
influence overall donation activity, and eventually lead to a reduced number of transplants. Preliminary Italian data
show that there was already a 25% reduction in the number of organs procured during the first four weeks of the
COVID-19 outbreak [96]. During the first five weeks of the pandemic, Spain reported a decrease in organ donation
and transplantation by 85% [97].
Temporary SoHO establishment staff absence
It is anticipated that absenteeism among staff working in SoHO establishments during the COVID-19 pandemic will
be higher than normal. Absence from work increases during epidemics or pandemics for a variety of reasons. Staff
may not be able to go to work due to transportation restrictions, community measures, illness, isolation/self-
isolation, or fear of being infected. The magnitude of absenteeism will depend on the local extent of the COVID-19
outbreak. Published employee absenteeism rates estimated during an influenza pandemic have ranged from 10 to
40 per cent [98]. According to a media report quoting the Scottish government, at the beginning of April 2020
more than 14% of NHS Scotland staff were off work. About 41% of those absences were related COVID-19
(https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-scotland-52133634).
Clinical demand for SoHO
The hospital response to the COVID-19 outbreak should include the following two goals: to facilitate the care of
patients with known or suspected COVID-19, and to reduce the risk of intra-hospital viral transmission to
healthcare workers and other patients. These measures may reduce demand for some essential SoHO due to a
probable reduction in elective healthcare and the postponing of non-essential SoHO therapies. Implementation of
patient blood management (PBM), a thorough evaluation of the appropriateness of blood component requests and
a reduction in elective surgery/healthcare with medium-high consumption of blood components is strongly
advisable.
Supply of critical material and equipment
The COVID-19 pandemic will probably influence the supply chain of medical devices, critical material, reagents,
technical equipment and personal protective equipment, causing potential disruptions in supply and shortages of
critical products. The pandemic may also affect transportation and trade due to travel restrictions, quarantine
requirements, border control measures and disrupted production. This may also affect the national and global
supply chain of critical materials and equipment used in the collection, laboratory testing, processing, storage,
distribution and clinical use of SoHO. The disrupted supply chain may include goods that are sourced or
manufactured in areas with COVID-19 sustained community transmission or those that are in high demand due to
increased usage (e.g. masks, gloves and hand sanitisers.) The disrupted supply chain for medical products, critical
material and equipment (including maintenance) therefore poses a risk to the sustainable and sufficient supply of
SoHO.
Transportation
Transportation and travel limitations may disrupt supply of essential SoHO, including organs for transplantation,
HSC (peripheral, bone marrow and cord blood), blood and blood components, tissues for lifesaving transplantation
and plasma for manufacturing medicinal products [4] within the country and internationally. In this respect the EU
Commission has published a Note for the Attention of National Competent Authorities, to facilitate cross-border
shipments of SoHO as essential goods and services within the Community and from non-EU countries [99].
Mitigation measures
According to available data on the epidemiology and pathogenesis of COVID-19, SoHO safety authorities in the
EU/EEA countries should continue with precautionary actions to mitigate the potential risks to the viral safety of
SoHO. With the increased spread of COVID-19 and extensive public health measures implemented in the EU/EEA,
SoHO authorities and establishments should still prioritise efforts to manage the sustainability and sufficiency of
the national SoHO supply. Measures should be as proportionate as possible to the evolution of the pandemic in real
time and consistent with governmental and public health advice. Authorities should pay special attention to
mitigating the risk of COVID-19 in transplant recipients. As some countries are starting to gradually ease measures
to contain the COVID-19 epidemic, it is crucial that SoHO establishments, remain vigilant and keep precautionary
measures in force until the pandemic is declared over.
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
7
Mitigation of risks to the safety of SoHO
Measures to prevent the theoretical risk of COVID-19 transmission through SoHO are precautionary. The measures
set out below can be implemented by SoHO establishments and plasma collection centres.
Blood, blood components and plasma for manufacturing of medicinal
products
Donor information
Blood establishments and plasma collection centres should inform blood and plasma donors of the nature and
clinical signs of COVID-19, transmission risks and related donation restrictions, as this will help them make
decisions on self-deferral from a donation.
Donor selection
Standard donor selection procedures involving the taking of medical and behavioural history and a physical
examination should focus on possible exposure and travel as well as clinical signs of acute respiratory infection.
Pre-selection measures
• Contacting donors by telephone to schedule donation and to inform about the selection procedure
• Considering the triage of donors at reception, including measurement of body temperature
• Temporary deferral of donors with a body temperature of 37.5°C or above and counselling to act in
accordance with the national public health recommendations for COVID-19.
Donor selection criteria
• Donors with confirmed COVID-19 are not eligible for blood or plasma donation.
• Donors possibly exposed to SARS-CoV-2 may donate blood or plasma at least 14 days after the last contact
with a confirmed case of COVID-19 or after returning from a country with sustained COVID-19 transmission.
• Donors who have recovered from confirmed COVID-19 may donate blood/plasma at least 14 days after laboratory
evidence of viral RNA clearance from the upper respiratory tract or at least 28 days after symptom resolution.
Pre-selection measures are intended to regulate the donor flow at the collection facility, enable physical distancing
and detect potentially infectious donors by triage. The exclusion of such donors may prevent the possible spread of
the virus in waiting rooms and help with donor selection.
Post-donation information and haemovigilance reporting
Blood establishments should also encourage donors to provide information on their health (including respiratory
infection) by telephone or other means of communication within 14 days of donation.
Quarantine of blood and blood components with delayed release
In the event of widespread and sustained transmission of COVID-19, one option is a quarantine of blood
components, with a delayed release once the donor has confirmed an absence of subsequent illness. However, due
to the disruption of existing processes and workflows, this may lead to an increase in the number of errors.
Therefore, this approach is not recommended.
Temporary interruption or rescheduling of donations
Introducing a temporary interruption in donations in areas with sustained transmission may affect the sustainability
of essential blood supply. Therefore, blood establishments and plasma donation centres should accommodate their
donation activities to ensure the blood supply to hospitals and plasma for fractionation. In order to maintain blood
supply in areas with sustained transmission, consideration may be given to the sourcing of essential blood and
blood components from non-affected parts of the country, or from other countries, if feasible.
Derogation of mandatory donor selection criteria
In the event of widespread transmission, blood establishments may need to adapt the measures applied to suit the
local epidemiological situation and ensure sustainability of blood supply.
Laboratory screening
There is no licensed test for the screening of donated blood or plasma for the presence of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Screening
is currently not recommended because transfusion-transmitted COVID-19 has not been reported; levels of detected RNA in
plasma coinciding with clinical symptoms are very low [41] and a screening policy has not been implemented for other
viral respiratory illnesses for which transfusion transmission remains theoretical, including influenza.
Pathogen reduction
Several coronaviruses are susceptible to inactivation with amotosalen or riboflavin and ultraviolet light, solvent-
detergent, methylene blue and light, and ultraviolet C light alone when applied to platelets and fresh frozen plasma
[100-103]. A recent study shows that a method using riboflavin and ultraviolet light may reduce SARS-CoV-2 in
plasma and platelets below the limit of detection in tissue culture [104]. Therefore, those blood establishments
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
8
which use pathogen reduction technology may be able to decrease the theoretical risk of COVID-19 transmission
through platelets and fresh frozen plasma. However, the implementation of pathogen reduction technology
requires time and resources and has some limitations, which have to be outweighed against the benefits, not only
for the current pandemic but also for other known and emerging microbial threats to the safety of plasma and
platelets [105].
Large-size lipid-enveloped RNA viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 [106] should be removed and/or inactivated during the
manufacturing of plasma derivatives [107-109], as has been demonstrated for other lipid-enveloped model viruses
[110]. Thus, regular screening procedures for plasma donors showing clinical symptoms and the established
processes of virus inactivation and removal during manufacturing should mitigate COVID-19 transmission through
plasma derivatives. Therefore, the COVID-19 outbreak is not considered to be a threat to the safety of plasma
protein therapies applying established fractionation and virus inactivating methods.
Non-reproductive cells and tissues
Donor interview
A trained interviewer should inform the potential living donor of cells and tissues of the nature and clinical signs of
COVID-19, transmission risks and related donation restrictions.
Donor selection
Standard donor selection procedures involving the taking of medical and behavioural history and a physical
examination should focus on possible exposure and travel as well as clinical signs of acute respiratory infection.
Donor selection criteria
Living donation
• Living donors with active confirmed COVID-19 are not eligible for donation.
• Living donors possibly exposed to SARS-CoV-2 may donate cells and tissues at least 14 days after the last
contact with a confirmed case of COVID-19 or after returning from a country with sustained COVID-19
transmission.
• Living donors recovering from confirmed COVID-19 may donate cells and tissues at least 14 days after
laboratory evidence of viral RNA clearance from the upper respiratory tract or 28 days after symptom
resolution.
• Donors of HSC recovering from or possibly exposed to SARS-CoV-2 may donate earlier than recommended if
there is an urgent patient need and no suitable alternative donor. Such a donor must be without symptoms
and have tested negative for the presence of the viral RNA in the upper respiratory tract.
• Cryopreservation of HSC or provision of an alternative donor as back-up are strongly recommended in
situations where there is an increased risk that a donor would become unavailable at the time of planned
transplantation due to community-acquired COVID-19, travel restrictions or logistical difficulties at a
transplant centre. If the use of non-frozen HSC is planned, a potential donor must be tested for the presence
of the viral RNA in the upper respiratory tract prior to starting the mobilisation procedure [111].
Deceased donation
• Deceased donors with active confirmed COVID-19 at the time of death are not eligible for tissue donation.
• Deceased donors who have recovered from COVID-19 may donate tissues if they tested negative for the
presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in upper respiratory tract specimens at least 14 days before death or if they
became asymptomatic at least 28 days before death.
• Tissues should not be collected from deceased donors who are without symptoms or diagnosis of COVID-19,
and who have lived in or visited areas of sustained community transmission of the virus unless:
− procured tissues are disinfected, sterilised or microbially inactivated using a procedure validated for
enveloped viruses, or
− donors tested negative for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in upper or lower respiratory tract specimens
collected within 72 hours before procurement.
Post-donation information and biovigilance reporting
Tissue establishments should encourage living donors to provide information on their health (including respiratory
infection) by telephone or other means of communication within 14 days of donation.
Temporary interruption or rescheduling of donations
Given the stringent community isolation and quarantine measures, a tissue establishment may consider a
temporary suspension of cells and tissues donations that are intended for non-urgent transplantation and thus can
be postponed.
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
9
Pathogen reduction
Viruses may be inactivated during the processing of some types of tissues (e.g. processed bone and decellularised
tissues). Tissue establishments should assess the risk and evaluate the ability of such processes to
inactivate/eliminate SARS-CoV-2 in tissues.
Reproductive cells and tissues and medically assisted reproduction
Non-partner sperm and oocyte donation
Donor information and selection
Collection centres should inform donors about the nature and clinical signs of COVID-19, transmission risks and
related donation restrictions. Standard donor selection procedures involving the taking of medical and behavioural
history and a physical examination should focus on possible exposure and travel, as well as clinical signs of acute
respiratory infection.
Donor selection criteria
• Donors with active confirmed COVID-19 are not eligible for donation.
• Donors possibly exposed to SARS-CoV-2 may donate sperm or oocytes at least 14 days after the last contact
with a confirmed case of COVID-19 or after returning from a country with sustained COVID-19 transmission.
• Donors who have recovered from confirmed COVID-19 may donate sperm or oocytes at least 14 days after
laboratory evidence for viral RNA clearance from the upper respiratory tract or at least 28 days after symptom
resolution.
Assisted reproduction technologies
Since the risk of COVID-19 transmission cannot be excluded because of the uncertain effects of SARS-CoV-2
infection in assisted reproduction technologies (ART) and pregnancy, the European Society of Human Reproduction
and Embryology (ESHRE) has suggested postponing assisted reproduction treatments as a precaution, to avoid any
unnecessary risk. However, ESHRE suggested continuing with necessary cryopreservation of gametes, embryos or
tissue in cases of urgent fertility preservation in oncology patients and performing elective oocyte or embryo
freezing for later embryo transfer for those patients having started assisted reproduction treatment [54].
Given the current stabilisation of the pandemic, ESHRE recommends restarting all ART treatments for any clinical
indication. Centres planning to restart ART treatments should follow the ESHRE guidance on recommencing ART
treatments [112].
Solid organs for transplantation
Transplantation information
Transplant candidates, recipients, and potential living donors should be informed of COVID-19 and aware of the
importance of frequent hand washing, avoiding crowds and applying physical distancing.
Donor selection
Living donation
• Living donors with active COVID-19 are not eligible for organ donation.
• Living donors possibly exposed to SARS-CoV-2 may donate organs at least 14 days after the last contact with
a confirmed case of COVID-19 or after returning from a country with sustained COVID-19 transmission.
• Living donors who have recovered from confirmed COVID-19 may donate organs at least 14 days after
laboratory evidence for viral RNA clearance from the upper respiratory tract or at least 28 days after symptom
resolution.
• If organ transplant procedure cannot be delayed, the donor’s nasopharyngeal swab specimens should be
tested for the presence of the viral RNA no longer than seven days before the donation.
Deceased donation
• Deceased donors with active COVID-19 at the time of death are not eligible for organ donation.
• Deceased donors who are without symptoms or diagnosis of COVID-19, and who have lived in or visited
areas of sustained community transmission may donate organs if they tested negative for the presence of
SARS-CoV-2 RNA in upper or lower respiratory tract specimens collected within 72 hours before organ
procurement.
• Deceased donors who have recovered from COVID-19 may donate tissues if they tested negative for the
presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in upper respiratory tract specimens at least 14 days before death or if they
became asymptomatic at least 28 days before death.
Temporary interruption or rescheduling of donations
During very high local COVID-19 transmission, temporary suspension of elective living donor transplantation or
deceased donation may need to be considered to protect the potential donor as well as the recipient.
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
10
Mitigation of risks to transplant recipients
Transplant centres may consider testing transplant candidates at risk of COVID-19 infection for the presence of
SARS-CoV-2 via nasopharyngeal swab before proceeding with the transplant procedure. Due to
immunosuppression, it is probable that transplant recipients are at increased risk of serious COVID-19. To minimise
the risk of being infected, transplant candidates/recipients and their immediate household contacts should avoid
any non-essential travel and overcrowded situations, practice physical distancing and frequently wash their hands.
Experience with previous coronavirus epidemics has shown that organ and HSC transplantation authorities should develop
measures for the management of organ recipients with COVID-19. These measures include managing transplant activities
when the transplant centre is temporarily closed and isolating recipients if transplanted during a potential incubation period
or in an area with sustained community transmission to protect the patient, family and hospital personnel.
It is also important for national and international transportation of organs and other cells and tissues intended for
transplantation to proceed uninterrupted. In geographically confined outbreaks, transplant authorities may consider
putting transplant candidates on the waiting list at alternative centres for transplantation. Potential living donors and
transplant recipients should be informed of the situation relating to the outbreak and possibilities for transplantation.
Mitigation of risks to staff in SoHO establishments
SoHO establishments should inform and educate staff on the nature of COVID-19, transmission routes, personal
protection and other containment measures. During the donation process, medical staff should apply appropriate
hand hygiene measures and use personal protective equipment in accordance with national public health
guidelines [113,114]. Personal protective measures in the donation area of a SoHO establishment which is not
located in a hospital environment should not be as stringent as in settings where staff take care of infected or
potentially infected patients. Infection control practices and measures should be in line with the national public
health recommendations for COVID-19 [115]. For deceased tissue and organ donation, standard protective
garments (surgical mask, gloves and cap) required for routine procedures should provide adequate protection for
procurement staff. Furthermore, exceptional measures, such as covering the donor’s oral and nasal cavities and
using a face shield or protection glasses, respiratory protection masks (FFP3) and double gloves, can be adopted to
prevent exposure to possible droplets produced when handling the procurement in deceased donors.
In the event of an individual staff member developing an acute respiratory illness, the person should leave the
workplace, self-isolate at home and immediately seek care, preferably first by phone, as per local guidelines.
Increased community transmission of COVID-19 may cause absenteeism due to illness, isolation or self-isolation,
transportation restrictions and the need to care for sick family members. SoHO establishments must anticipate this
early on and consider pre-emptive measures to mitigate the impact on essential activities. Laboratory staff should
follow standard laboratory biosafety practices. In the event of diagnostic testing being provided for patients or
suspected cases, procedures for handling and testing blood samples should be in line with laboratory biosafety
guidance for COVID-19 [116]. In terms of organisation, SoHO establishments may consider changing arrangements
in offices/laboratories, cancelling non-essential meetings, minimising staff gatherings, holding teleconference
meetings even if in the same building, reviewing catering arrangements, staggering staff dining and arranging for
as many critical staff as possible to work from home.
Mitigation of risks to an adequate and sustained supply of SoHO
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to be significant for SoHO establishments and will potentially affect
the SoHO supply chain. It is therefore important that SoHO safety authorities and establishments update or
develop and activate contingency (preparedness) plans and define actions that must be executed before, during
and after the outbreak in order to maintain the sustainability of supply. The main objective is to make every effort
to ensure a continued supply of safe, high-quality, life-saving products and services at the level demanded by the
healthcare community.
In order to respond to the risk posed by the COVID-19 pandemic to maintaining a sufficient and sustainable supply
of SoHO and in accordance with previously suggested principles [117], EU/EEA Member States are encouraged to
undertake the measures set out below.
• Assess the risk posed by COVID-19 to the safety and sufficiency of SOHO supply, taking into account the
extent and epidemiology of COVID-19 spread, public health measures implemented, status of SoHO supply
and operational costs.
• Ensure the inclusion of the SoHO national competent authorities and/or SoHO establishment representatives
in the national COVID-19 outbreak contingency planning body. This will ensure that:
− SoHO contingency planning will be included in and compatible with the national plan and also that
communications to citizens clarify that regular blood and plasma donation are essential activities that
are still permitted even though physical distancing rules and recommendations may apply;
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
11
− national policies and guidance prioritise the supply of personal protective equipment, such as facemasks
and gloves, for SoHO collection facilities and SoHO establishments, in the same way as for hospitals;
− national border controls facilitate the passage of critical and essential SoHO.
• Establish a mechanism for the SoHO national competent authorities and establishments to receive regular,
up-to-date epidemiological information on the spread of COVID-19 in the country and abroad. Daily outbreak
situation updates are available on ECDC’s website.
• Develop national/regional contingency plans for blood, cells, tissue and organ supplies which are reviewed
and updated constantly, in relation to the following areas:
− risk of transmission of COVID-19 by SoHO which remains theoretical but cannot be completely excluded;
− temporary loss of donors resulting in a reduced supply;
− temporary loss of staff due to COVID-19;
− changes in the clinical demand for SoHO;
− working with national health authorities, hospitals and other responsible bodies to determine and
monitor expected blood, plasma-derived medicinal products, cells and tissues, and organ usage during
the COVID-19 outbreak and to plan donation activities accordingly;
− changes in the local and general epidemiological situation in the country.
• Support SoHO establishments and plasma collection centres in developing and implementing business
continuity plans related to the COVID-19 outbreak. This may include activities to:
− activate the business continuity plan and set up a business continuity management team representing
the key functions and decision-makers in accordance with national requirements;
− implement measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19 among employees, customers/clients, and
partners;
− make operational changes at blood, cell, tissue and organ donation sites (adapt the type of blood
donation sessions to the local situation, use an appointment strategy in communicating with donors,
extend the opening hours, etc.;
− increase the collection of plasma for manufacturing in Europe to mitigate the risk of mid- and long-term
PDMP supply interruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic;
− maintain critical operations and services by reviewing stocks of critical supplies and increase supplies
where possible. Regularly check with contingency partners to ensure that they can fulfil their
commitments;
− communicate regularly with staff so that they feel assured that the situation is being managed and
inform them as the situation changes. Staff should be clearly informed about procedures after direct
contact with a staff member, donor or patient who has tested positive for COVID-19, as well as the
need for self-isolation and physical distancing.
• Continue with the regular and effective communication between SoHO establishments, national competent
authorities, national health authorities, ECDC, the European Commission and other stakeholders to facilitate
an adequate and proportional response to the COVID-19 outbreak at local, national and EU/EEA level. The
alert platforms hosted by the European Commission for communication between Member States’ SoHO
authorities, Rapid Alert Blood and Rapid Alert Tissues and Cells platforms may be used for communication
between national competent authorities, the European Commission and ECDC in order to share data on
measures implemented and difficulties with supply.
Acknowledgments
This document was prepared by Dragoslav Domanović and reviewed by a panel of experts convened by the
European Commission (DG Sante). The experts were nominated by Member State competent authorities for blood,
tissues, cells and organs in Spain, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Poland, Greece and Malta and by the
European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines (EDQM ) and the following SoHO stakeholder associations: the
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology (ESHRE), the European Association of Tissue and Cell
Banks (EATCB), the European Blood Alliance (EBA), the European Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation
(EBMT), the International Plasma Fractionators Association (IPFA), the World Marrow Donors Association (WMDA),
the Plasma Protein Therapeutics Association (PPTA), and the European Plasma Alliance (EPA).
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
12
References
1. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19): increased transmission globally – fifth update Stockholm: ECDC; 2020. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/RRA-outbreak-novel-coronavirus-disease-2019-
increase-transmission-globally-COVID-19.pdf
2. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2): increased transmission beyond China – fourth update. 2020. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/SARS-CoV-2-risk-assessment-14-feb-2020.pdf
3. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic:
increased transmission in the EU/EEA and the UK – sixth update. 2020. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/RRA-sixth-update-Outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-
disease-2019-COVID-19.pdf
4. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and supply of
substances of human origin in the EU/EEA. 2020 [18 April 2020]. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid-19-supply-substances-human-origin.pdf
5. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Factsheet for health professionals on Coronaviruses
2019. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/factsheet-health-professionals-coronaviruses
6. European Commission. Directive 2002/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January
2003 setting standards of quality and safety for the collection, testing, processing, storage and distribution of
human blood and blood componentsand amending Directive 2001/83/EC. 2003. Available from: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A32002L0098
7. European Commission. Commission Directive 2004/33/EC of 22 March 2004 implementing Directive
2002/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards certain technical requirements for
blood and blood components [Internet]. 2004. Available from: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32004L0033&from=EN
8. European Commission. Directive 2010/45/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 July 2010
on standards of quality and safety of human organs intended for transplantation. 2010. Available from:
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:32010L0053&from=EN
9. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. COVID-19. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19-pandemic
10. World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak 2019. Available from:
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019
11. World Health Organization. Statement on the second meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005)
Emergency Committee regarding the outbreak of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Geneva: WHO; 2020.
Available from: https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/30-01-2020-statement-on-the-second-meeting-of-the-
international-health-regulations-(2005)-emergency-committee-regarding-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-
(2019-ncov)
12. World Health Organization. WHO Director-General's opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19 - 11
March 2020. WHO; 2020. Available from: https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-
opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020
13. Gorbalenya AE, Baker SC, Baric RS, de Groot RJ, Drosten C, Gulyaeva AA, et al. The species Severe acute
respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: classifying 2019-nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV-2. Nature
Microbiology. 2 March 2020.
14. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Case definition and European surveillance for COVID-19,
as of 2 March 2020. [18 April 2020]. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/case-definition-and-
european-surveillance-human-infection-novel-coronavirus-2019-ncov
15. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in the EU/EEA
and the UK – eighth update. Stockholm, Sweden 2020 [15 April 2020]. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid-19-rapid-risk-assessment-coronavirus-
disease-2019-eighth-update-8-april-2020.pdf
16. World Health Organization. Laboratory testing for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in suspected human cases.
Interim guidance 19 March 2020. [cited 13 March 2020]. Available from:
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331329/WHO-COVID-19-laboratory-2020.4-
eng.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
17. European Commission. Current performance of COVID-19 test methods and devices and proposed
performance criteria - Working document of Commission services 2020 [23 April 2020]. Available from:
https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/40805
18. World Health Organization. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak – Emergency Use Listing Procedure
(EUL) announcement. 2020. Available from: https://www.who.int/diagnostics_laboratory/EUL/en/
19. FIND. SARS-COV-2 molecular assay evaluation: Results 2020 [23 April 2020]. Available from:
https://www.finddx.org/covid-19/sarscov2-eval-molecular/molecular-eval-results/
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
13
20. European Commission. Current performance of COVID-19 test methods and devices and proposed
performance criteria - Working document of Commission services 2020 [23 April 2020]. Available from:
https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/40805
21. Okba NMA, Muller MA, Li W, Wang C, GeurtsvanKessel CH, Corman VM, et al. Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome Coronavirus 2-Specific Antibody Responses in Coronavirus Disease 2019 Patients. Emerg Infect Dis.
2020 Apr 8;26(7).
22. Amanat F, Stadlbauer D, Strohmeier S, Nguyen T, Chromikova V, McMahon M, et al. A serological assay to
detect SARS-CoV-2 seroconversion in humans. medRxiv. 17 March 2020.20037713.
23. World Health Organization. Laboratory biosafety guidance related to the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV).
Interim guidance, 12 February 2020. Available from: https://www.who.int/docs/default-
source/coronaviruse/laboratory-biosafety-novel-coronavirus-version-1-1.pdf?sfvrsn=912a9847_2
24. Woelfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Zange S, Mueller MA, et al. Clinical presentation and
virological assessment of hospitalized cases of coronavirus disease 2019 in a travel-associated transmission
cluster. medRxiv. 5 March 2020.20030502.
25. Zhao J, Yuan Q, Wang H, Liu W, Liao X, Su Y, et al. Antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in patients of novel
coronavirus disease 2019. Clin Infect Dis. 28 March 2020.
26. Liu W, Liu L, Kou G, Zheng Y, Ding Y, Ni W, et al. Evaluation of Nucleocapsid and Spike Protein-based ELISAs
for detecting antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. J Clin Microbiol. 30 March 2020.
27. Long Q-x, Deng H-j, Chen J, Hu J, Liu B-z, Liao P, et al. Antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2 in COVID-19
patients: the perspective application of serological tests in clinical practice. medRxiv. 18 March
2020.20038018.
28. Wan WY, Lim SH, Seng EH. Cross-reaction of sera from COVID-19 patients with SARS-CoV assays. medRxiv.
17 March 2020.20034454.
29. European Medicines Agency. Update on treatments and vaccines against COVID-19 under development.
2020. Available from: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/update-treatments-vaccines-against-covid-19-
under-development
30. European Medicines Agency. EMA provides recommendations on compassionate use of remdesivir for COVID-
19. 2020. Available from: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/ema-provides-recommendations-
compassionate-use-remdesivir-covid-19
31. European Medicines Agency. COVID-19: chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine only to be used in clinical trials
or emergency use programmes. [23 April 2020]. Available from:
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/press-release/covid-19-chloroquine-hydroxychloroquine-only-be-
used-clinical-trials-emergency-use-programmes_en.pdf
32. World Health Organization. Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection when COVID-19 is
suspected. 2020. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications-detail/clinical-management-of-severe-
acute-respiratory-infection-when-novel-coronavirus-(ncov)-infection-is-suspected
33. Shen C, Wang Z, Zhao F, Yang Y, Li J, Yuan J, et al. Treatment of 5 Critically Ill Patients With COVID-19 With
Convalescent Plasma. JAMA. 27 March 2020.
34. Duan K, Liu B, Li C, Zhang H, Yu T, Qu J, et al. Effectiveness of convalescent plasma therapy in severe
COVID-19 patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 6 April 2020.
35. U.S. Food & Drug Administration (FDA). Recommendations for Investigational COVID-19 Convalescent Plasma
2020. Available from: https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/investigational-new-drug-ind-or-device-
exemption-ide-process-cber/recommendations-investigational-covid-19-convalescent-plasma
36. European Commission. An EU programme of COVID-19 convalescent plasma collection and transfusion 2020
[15 April 2020]. Available from:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/blood_tissues_organs/docs/guidance_plasma_covid19_en.pdf
37. Paul-Ehrlich Institute. Paul-Ehrlich-Institut Approves First COVID-19 Therapy Study with Convalescent Plasma.
2020 [23 April 2020]. Available from: https://www.pei.de/EN/newsroom/press-releases/year/2020/07-pei-
approves-first-covid-19-therapy-study-with-convalescent-plasma.html?fbclid=IwAR0Qwn8jYQ22ISqZuO
38. World Health Organization. Maintaining a safe and adequate blood supply during the pandemic outbreak of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Interim guidance 20 March 2020. [cited 22 April 2020].
39. Zhang Y, Bergelson JM. Adenovirus receptors. J Virol. 2005 Oct;79(19):12125-31.
40. Harmer D, Gilbert M, Borman R, Clark KL. Quantitative mRNA expression profiling of ACE 2, a novel
homologue of angiotensin converting enzyme. FEBS Letters. 2002;532(1-2):107-10.
41. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel
coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020 Feb 15;395(10223):497-506.
42. Young BE, Ong SWX, Kalimuddin S, Low JG, Tan SY, Loh J, et al. Epidemiologic Features and Clinical Course
of Patients Infected With SARS-CoV-2 in Singapore. JAMA. 3 March 2020.
43. Wang W, Xu Y, Gao R, Lu R, Han K, Wu G, et al. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Different Types of Clinical
Specimens. JAMA. 11 March 2020.
44. Peng L, Liu J, Xu W, Luo Q, Deng K, Lin B, et al. 2019 Novel Coronavirus can be detected in urine, blood, anal
swabs and oropharyngeal swabs samples. medRxiv. 21 February 2020.20026179.
45. Chang L, Zhao L, Gong H, Wang L, Wang L. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 RNA Detected
in Blood Donations. Emerg Infect Dis. 2020 Apr 3;26(7).
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
14
46. Corman VM, Rabenau HF, Adams O, Oberle D, Funk MB, Keller-Stanislawski B, et al. SARS-CoV-2
asymptomatic and symptomatic patients and risk for transfusion transmission. medRxiv. 29 March
2020.20039529.
47. Xia J, Tong J, Liu M, Shen Y, Guo D. Evaluation of coronavirus in tears and conjunctival secretions of patients
with SARS-CoV-2 infection. J Med Virol. 26 Feb 2020.
48. Wu P, Duan F, Luo C, Liu Q, Qu X, Liang L, et al. Characteristics of Ocular Findings of Patients With
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Hubei Province, China. JAMA Ophthalmol. 31 March 2020.
49. Colavita F, Lapa D, Carletti F, Lalle E, Bordi L, Marsella P, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Isolation From Ocular Secretions
of a Patient With COVID-19 in Italy With Prolonged Viral RNA Detection. Ann Intern Med. 17 April 2020.
50. European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & Healthcare. Guide to the quality and safety of tissues and
cells for human application, 4th edition, Strasbourg 2019 [23 April 2020]. Available from:
https://www.edqm.eu/en/organs-tissues-and-cells-technical-guides
51. Douglas GC, O'Bryan MK, Hedger MP, Lee DK, Yarski MA, Smith AI, et al. The novel angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) homolog, ACE2, is selectively expressed by adult Leydig cells of the testis. Endocrinology. 2004
Oct;145(10):4703-11.
52. Tipnis SR, Hooper NM, Hyde R, Karran E, Christie G, Turner AJ. A human homolog of angiotensin-converting
enzyme. Cloning and functional expression as a captopril-insensitive carboxypeptidase. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct
27;275(43):33238-43.
53. Reis FM, Bouissou DR, Pereira VM, Camargos AF, dos Reis AM, Santos RA. Angiotensin-(1-7), its receptor
Mas, and the angiotensin-converting enzyme type 2 are expressed in the human ovary. Fertil Steril. 2011
Jan;95(1):176-81.
54. European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. Assisted reproduction and COVID-19. An updated
statement from ESHRE 2020 [cited 19 April 2020]. Available from: https://www.eshre.eu/Press-Room/ESHRE-News
55. Liao X, Yang H, Kong J, Yang H. Chest CT Findings in a Pregnant Patient with 2019 Novel Coronavirus
Disease 2020. Available from: http://balkanmedicaljournal.org/uploads/pdf/pdf_BMJ_2196.pdf
56. Liu H, Liu F, Li J, Zhang T, Wang D, Lan W. Clinical and CT imaging features of the COVID-19 pneumonia:
Focus on pregnant women and children. J Infect. 20 March 2020.
57. Chen S, Liao E, Cao D, Gao Y, Sun G, Shao Y. Clinical analysis of pregnant women with 2019 novel
coronavirus pneumonia. J Med Virol. 28 March 2020.
58. Mullins E, Evans D, Viner RM, O'Brien P, Morris E. Coronavirus in pregnancy and delivery: rapid review.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol. 17 March 2020.
59. Karimi-Zarchi M, Neamatzadeh H, Dastgheib SA, Abbasi H, Mirjalili SR, Behforouz A, et al. Vertical
Transmission of Coronavirus Disease 19 (COVID-19) from Infected Pregnant Mothers to Neonates: A Review.
Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2020 Apr 2:1-5.
60. Schwartz DA, Graham AL. Potential Maternal and Infant Outcomes from (Wuhan) Coronavirus 2019-nCoV
Infecting Pregnant Women: Lessons from SARS, MERS, and Other Human Coronavirus Infections. Viruses.
2020 Feb 10;12(2).
61. Schwartz DA. An Analysis of 38 Pregnant Women with COVID-19, Their Newborn Infants, and Maternal-Fetal
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2: Maternal Coronavirus Infections and Pregnancy Outcomes. Arch Pathol Lab
Med. 17 March 2020.
62. Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, Luo F, Yu X, Zhang W, et al. Clinical characteristics and intrauterine vertical
transmission potential of COVID-19 infection in nine pregnant women: a retrospective review of medical
records. Lancet. 2020 Mar 7;395(10226):809-15.
63. Li Y, Zhao R, Zheng S, Chen X, Wang J, Sheng X, et al. Lack of Vertical Transmission of Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2, China. Emerg Infect Dis. 2020 Jun 17;26(6).
64. Zeng L, Xia S, Yuan W, Yan K, Xiao F, Shao J, et al. Neonatal Early-Onset Infection With SARS-CoV-2 in 33
Neonates Born to Mothers With COVID-19 in Wuhan, China. JAMA Pediatr. 26 March 2020.
65. Yu N, Li W, Kang Q, Xiong Z, Wang S, Lin X, et al. Clinical features and obstetric and neonatal outcomes of
pregnant patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective, single-centre, descriptive study. Lancet
Infect Dis. 24 March 2020.
66. Wang X, Zhou Z, Zhang J, Zhu F, Tang Y, Shen X. A case of 2019 Novel Coronavirus in a pregnant woman
with preterm delivery. Clin Infect Dis. 28 Februay 2020.
67. Dong L, Tian J, He S, Zhu C, Wang J, Liu C, et al. Possible Vertical Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 From an
Infected Mother to Her Newborn. JAMA. 26 March 2020.
68. Zeng H, Xu C, Fan J, Tang Y, Deng Q, Zhang W, et al. Antibodies in Infants Born to Mothers With COVID-19
Pneumonia. Jama. 26 March 2020.
69. Fan C, Lei D, Fang C, Li C, Wang M, Liu Y, et al. Perinatal Transmission of COVID-19 Associated SARS-CoV-2:
Should We Worry? Clin Infect Dis. 17 March 2020.
70. Zou X, Chen K, Zou J, Han P, Hao J, Han Z. Single-cell RNA-seq data analysis on the receptor ACE2
expression reveals the potential risk of different human organs vulnerable to 2019-nCoV infection. Frontiers of
Medicine. 12 March 2020.
71. Gembardt F, Sterner-Kock A, Imboden H, Spalteholz M, Reibitz F, Schultheiss HP, et al. Organ-specific
distribution of ACE2 mRNA and correlating peptidase activity in rodents. Peptides. 2005 Jul;26(7):1270-7.
72. Xu H, Zhong L, Deng J, Peng J, Dan H, Zeng X, et al. High expression of ACE2 receptor of 2019-nCoV on the
epithelial cells of oral mucosa. Int J Oral Sci. 2020 Feb 24;12(1):8.
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
15
73. Zou X, Chen K, Zou J, Han P, Hao J, Han Z. Single-cell RNA-seq data analysis on the receptor ACE2
expression reveals the potential risk of different human organs vulnerable to 2019-nCoV infection. Front Med.
12 March 2020.
74. Zhao Y, Zhao Z, Wang Y, Zhou Y, Ma Y, Zuo W. Single-cell RNA expression profiling of ACE2, the putative
receptor of Wuhan 2019-nCov. bioRxiv. 26 January 2020.919985.
75. Zhang H, Kang Z, Gong H, Xu D, Wang J, Li Z, et al. The digestive system is a potential route of 2019-nCov
infection: a bioinformatics analysis based on single-cell transcriptomes. bioRxiv. 30 January 2020.927806.
76. Chai X, Hu L, Zhang Y, Han W, Lu Z, Ke A, et al. Specific ACE2 Expression in Cholangiocytes May Cause Liver
Damage After 2019-nCoV Infection. bioRxiv. 3 February 2020.931766.
77. Huang J, Lin H, Wu Y, Fang Y, Kumar R, Chen G, et al. COVID-19 in post-transplantation patients- report of
two cases. Am J Transplant. 3 April 2020.
78. Zhu L, Xu X, Ma K, Yang J, Guan H, Chen S, et al. Successful recovery of COVID-19 pneumonia in a renal
transplant recipient with long-term immunosuppression. Am J Transplant. 17 March 2020.
79. Chen S, Yin Q, Shi H, Du D, Chang S, Ni L, et al. A familial cluster, including a kidney transplant recipient, of
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Wuhan, China. Am J Transplant. 3 April 2020.
80. Wang J, Li X, Cao G, Wu X, Wang Z, Yan T. COVID-19 in a Kidney Transplant Patient. Eur Urol. 6 April 2020.
81. Marx D, Moulin B, Fafi-Kremer S, Benotmane I, Gautier G, Perrin P, et al. First case of COVID-19 in a kidney
transplant recipient treated with belatacept. Am J Transplant. 13 April 2020.
82. Zhang H, Chen Y, Yuan Q, Xia QX, Zeng XP, Peng JT, et al. Identification of Kidney Transplant Recipients with
Coronavirus Disease 2019. Eur Urol. 2 April 2020.
83. Banerjee D, Popoola J, Shah S, Ster IC, Quan V, Phanish M. COVID-19 infection in kidney transplant
recipients. Kidney Int. 2020.
84. Huang JF, Zheng KI, George J, Gao HN, Wei RN, Yan HD, et al. Fatal outcome in a liver transplant recipient
with COVID-19. Am J Transplant. 10 April 2020.
85. Bhoori S, Rossi RE, Citterio D, Mazzaferro V. COVID-19 in long-term liver transplant patients: preliminary
experience from an Italian transplant centre in Lombardy. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 9 April 2020.
86. Bin L, Yangzhong W, Yuanyuan Z, Huibo S, Fanjun Z, Zhishui C. Successful Treatment of Severe COVID-19
Pneumonia in a Liver Transplant Recipient. Am J Transplant. 3 April 2020.
87. Kumar D, Tellier R, Draker R, Levy G, Humar A. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in a liver
transplant recipient and guidelines for donor SARS screening. Am J Transplant. 2003 Aug;3(8):977-81.
88. AlGhamdi M, Mushtaq F, Awn N, Shalhoub S. MERS CoV infection in two renal transplant recipients: case
report. Am J Transplant. 2015 Apr;15(4):1101-4.
89. Lam MF, Ooi GC, Lam B, Ho JC, Seto WH, Ho PL, et al. An indolent case of severe acute respiratory
syndrome. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2004 Jan 1;169(1):125-8.
90. Guillen E, Pineiro GJ, Revuelta I, Rodriguez D, Bodro M, Moreno A, et al. Case report of COVID-19 in a kidney
transplant recipient: Does immunosuppression alter the clinical presentation? Am J Transplant. 20 March 2020.
91. European Agency for Safety and Health at Work. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak and workplace
safety and health 2020 [18 April 2020]. Available from: https://osha.europa.eu/en/highlights/coronavirus-
disease-covid-19-outbreak-and-workplace-safety-and-health
92. Shan H, Zhang P. Viral attacks on the blood supply: the impact of severe acute respiratory syndrome in
Beijing. Transfusion. 2004 Apr;44(4):467-9.
93. Teo D. Blood suplly management during an influenza pandemic. . ISBT Science series. 2009 (4(n2)):293-8.
94. Kwon SY, Lee EH, Kim HSe. Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-COV) outbreak in South
Korea: risk management at the Korean Red Cross Seoul Nambu Blood Center (abstract). Vox Sanguinis.
2015;109:18.
95. NHS Blood and Transplant. Extra safety measures after coronavirus uncertainty causes drop in donations.
2020. Available from: https://www.blood.co.uk/news-and-campaigns/news-and-statements/extra-safety-
measures-after-coronavirus-uncertainty-causes-drop-in-donations/
96. Angelico R, Trapani S, Manzia TM, Lombardini L, Tisone G, Cardillo M. The COVID-19 outbreak in Italy: initial
implications for organ transplantation programs. Am J Transplant. 3 April 2020.
97. Spanish National Transplant Organization. COVID-19: Impact on donation and transplant activity. 2020 [22
April 2020]. Available from: http://www.ont.es/infesp/Paginas/Impacto_tx.aspx
98. Thanner MH, Links JM, Meltzer MI, Scheulen JJ, Kelen GD. Understanding estimated worker absenteeism
rates during an influenza pandemic. Am J Disaster Med. 2011 Mar-Apr;6(2):89-105.
99. European Commission. COVID-19 and Substances of Human Origin. Cross-Border shipments of SoHO as essential
goods and servicesNote for the attention of national competent authorities, 2020 [18 April 2020]. Available from:
https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/blood_tissues_organs/docs/2020_soho_crossbordershipments_en.pdf
100. Hashem AM, Hassan AM, Tolah AM, Alsaadi MA, Abunada Q, Damanhouri GA, et al. Amotosalen and
ultraviolet A light efficiently inactivate MERS-coronavirus in human platelet concentrates. Transfus Med. 2019
Dec;29(6):434-41.
101. Hindawi SI, Hashem AM, Damanhouri GA, El-Kafrawy SA, Tolah AM, Hassan AM, et al. Inactivation of Middle
East respiratory syndrome-coronavirus in human plasma using amotosalen and ultraviolet A light.
Transfusion. 2018 Jan;58(1):52-9.
ECDC REPORT Coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) and supply of substances of human origin in the EU/EEA – first update
16
102. Pinna D, Sampson-Johannes A, Clementi M, Poli G, Rossini S, Lin L, et al. Amotosalen photochemical
inactivation of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus in human platelet concentrates. Transfus Med.
2005 Aug;15(4):269-76.
103. Keil SD, Bowen R, Marschner S. Inactivation of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in
plasma products using a riboflavin-based and ultraviolet light-based photochemical treatment. Transfusion.
2016 Dec;56(12):2948-52.
104. Keil SD, Ragan I, Yonemura S, Hartson L, Dart NK, Bowen R. Inactivation of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 in plasma and platelet products using a riboflavin and ultraviolet light-based
photochemical treatment. Vox Sang. 20 April 2020.
105. Domanovic D, Ushiro-Lumb I, Compernolle V, Brusin S, Funk M, Gallian P, et al. Pathogen reduction of blood
components during outbreaks of infectious diseases in the European Union: an expert opinion from the
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control consultation meeting. Blood Transfus. 2019
Nov;17(6):433-48.
106. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) 2019. Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html
107. Rabenau HF, Biesert L, Schmidt T, Bauer G, Cinatl J, Doerr HW. SARS-coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and the safety
of a solvent/detergent (S/D) treated immunoglobulin preparation. Biologicals. 2005 Jun;33(2):95-9.
108. Groner A, Broumis C, Fang R, Nowak T, Popp B, Schafer W, et al. Effective inactivation of a wide range of
viruses by pasteurization. Transfusion. 2018 Jan;58(1):41-51.
109. Yunoki M, Urayama T, Yamamoto I, Abe S, Ikuta K. Heat sensitivity of a SARS-associated coronavirus
introduced into plasma products. Vox Sang. 2004 Nov;87(4):302-3.
110. Lamarre A, Talbot PJ. Effect of pH and temperature on the infectivity of human coronavirus 229E. Can J
Microbiol. 1989 Oct;35(10):972-4.
111. European Society of Blood and Marrow transplantation. Coronavirus disease COVID-19: EBMT
Recommendations, update 21 April 2020. Available from: https://www.ebmt.org/sites/default/files/2020-
04/EBMT_COVID-19-guidelines_v.7.1%282020-04-21%29.pdf
112. European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. ESHRE guidance on recommencing ART treatments. 2020
[26 April 2020]. Available from: https://www.eshre.eu/
113. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Infection prevention and control for COVID-19 in
healthcare settings. 2020. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/COVID-
19-infection-prevention-and-control-healthcare-settings-march-2020.pdf
114. World Health Organization. Advice on the use of masks the community, during home care and in health care
settings in the context of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak. 2020.
115. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Interim guidance for environmental cleaning in non-
healthcare facilities exposed to SARS-CoV-2. 2020. Available from:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/coronavirus-SARS-CoV-2-guidance-environmental-
cleaning-non-healthcare-facilities.pdf
116. World Health Organization. Laboratory biosafety guidance related to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). 2020.
Available from: https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331138/WHO-WPE-GIH-2020.1-eng.pdf
117. World Health Organization. Maintaining a Safe and Adequate Blood Supply during Pandemic Influenza Guidelines
for Blood Transfusion Services (July 2011). Available from:
https://www.who.int/bloodsafety/publications/WHO_Guidelines_on_Pandemic_Influenza_and_Blood_Supply.pdf
