Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: guidance on alternative swab types and
transport media
Updated 16 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for sampling and for diagnostic laboratories
Public Health
England
Difficulties with supply chain for key virological testing components such as swabs and transport medium have led to local
variations in practice with respect to sampling which may also impact on PCR diagnostic test performance.
In addition, it is important that we make best use of our available testing capacity by utilising a single swab wherever
practical. To mitigate the supply issues, recommendations are two-fold:
1.Reduce demand for swab usage by:
using a single swab for sampling throat then nose
reduce level of testing for non-COVID related viruses (for example influenza and other respiratory viruses, as perRoyal
College of Pathologists guidance
2.Use alternative swabs and transport medium in accordance with a locally validated laboratory strategy for preferred and
secondary source of both swabs and transport medium. Recommendations for alternatives are provided below.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Alternative swab types
Multiple reports indicate that flocked or rayon or Dacron swabs are the preferred types for collecting respiratory samples,
with decreased sensitivity with cotton swabs. Urethral, pernasal or mini-tip swabs may also be alternatives if standard
sized swabs are not available. Dry swabs are not optimal for respiratory samples but can be used if no alternative is
available. ‘Charcoal’ swabs (such as swabs transported in a charcoal-containing medium) are not suitable.
Swabs with polystyrene shafts should be used, as swabs with wooden shafts may containPCR inhibitors and may also be
a safety issue, especially for patients who are self-swabbing or when used to swab young children.
Alternative transport medium
Laboratories can use alternatives to Viral Transport Medium (VTM) subject to local validation, including Universal
Transport Medium (UTM) or liquid Amies medium without charcoal (Amies medium with charcoal is not suitable). If
necessary the following can be used as alternatives (in order of hierarchy): Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) with a
protein source such as albumin or bovine serum, PBS alone, saline, or no transport medium (such as a dry swab).
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
