Government of India
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Directorate General of Health Services
(EMR Division)
Revised Guidelines on Clinical
Management of COVID – 19
This document is intended for clinicians taking care of hospitalised adult and paediatric patients
of COVID – 19. It is not meant to replace clinical judgment or specialist consultation but rather to
strengthen clinical management of these patients and provide to up-to-date guidance. Best
practices for COVID - 19 including IPC and optimized supportive care for severely ill patients as
considered essential. This document aims to provide clinicians with updated interim guidance on
timely, effective, and safe supportive management of patients with COVID - 19, particularly those
with severe acute respiratory illness and critically ill.
31st
March 2020
1
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
No. Topic Page No.
1 Case definitions 1
2 Clinical features 2
3 Immediate implementation of IPC measures 4
4 Laboratory diagnosis 6
5 Early supporting therapy and monitoring 8
6 Management of hypoxemic respiratory failure
and ARDS
10
7 Management of septic shock 13
8 Other therapeutic measures 15
9 Prevention of complications 16
10 Specific therapy 18
When to suspect
• All symptomatic individuals who have undertaken international travel in the last 14 days
or
• All symptomatic contacts of laboratory confirmed cases
or
• All symptomatic healthcare personnel (HCP)
or
• All hospitalized patients with severe acute respiratory illness ( SARI) (fever AND
cough and/or shortness of breath)
or
• Asymptomatic direct and high risk contacts of a confirmed case (should be tested once
between day 5 and day 14 after contact)
Symptomatic refers to fever/cough/shortness of breath.
Direct and high-risk contacts include those who live in the same household with a confirmed
case and HCP who examined a confirmed case.
1. Case definition
Confirmed case
A person with laboratory confirmation of COVID-19 infection, irrespective of clinical signs and
symptoms
1
2
2. Clinical features
COVID–19 may present with mild, moderate, or severe illness; the latter includes severe
pneumonia, ARDS, sepsis and septic shock. Early recognition of suspected patients allows for
timely initiation of IPC (see Table 1). Early identification of those with severe manifestations (see
Table 1) allows for immediate optimized supportive care treatments and safe, rapid admission (or
referral) to intensive care unit .
Table 1: Clinical syndromes associated with COVID - 19 infection
Uncomplicated
illness
Patients with uncomplicated upper respiratory tract viral infection, may have
non-specific symptoms such as fever, cough, sore throat, nasal congestion,
malaise, headache. The elderly and immunosuppressed may present with
atypical symptoms.
Mild
pneumonia
Patient with pneumonia and no signs of severe pneumonia.
Child with non-severe pneumonia has cough or difficulty in breathing/ fast
breathing: (fast breathing - in breaths/min): <2 months, ≥60; 2–11 months, ≥50; 1–
5 years, ≥40 and no signs of severe pneumonia
Severe
pneumonia
Adolescent or adult: fever or suspected respiratory infection, plus one of the
following; respiratory rate >30 breaths/min, severe respiratory distress, SpO2 <90%
on room air
Child with cough or difficulty in breathing, plus at least one of the following: central
cyanosis or SpO2 <90%; severe respiratory distress (e.g. grunting, chest in-
drawing); signs of pneumonia with any of the following danger signs: inability to
breastfeed or drink, lethargy or unconsciousness, or convulsions. Other signs of
pneumonia may be present: chest indrawing, fast breathing (in breaths/min): <2
months ≥60; 2–11 months ≥50; 1–5 years ≥40. The diagnosis is clinical; chest
imaging can exclude complications.
Acute
Respiratory
Distress
Syndrome
Onset: new or worsening respiratory symptoms within one week of known clinical
insult.
Chest imaging (radiograph, CT scan, or lung ultrasound): bilateral opacities, not
fully explained by effusions, lobar or lung collapse, or nodules.
3
Origin of oedema: respiratory failure not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid
overload. Need objective assessment (e.g. echocardiography) to exclude hydrostatic
cause of oedema if no risk factor present.
Oxygenation (adults):
• Mild ARDS: 200 mmHg < PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 300 mmHg (with PEEP or CPAP ≥5
cm H2O, or non-ventilated)
• Moderate ARDS: 100 mmHg < PaO2/FiO2 ≤200 mmHg with PEEP ≥5 cm H2O,
or non-ventilated)
• Severe ARDS: PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 100 mmHg with PEEP ≥5 cm H2O, or non-
ventilated)
• When PaO2 is not available, SpO2/FiO2 ≤315 suggests ARDS (including innon-
ventilated patients)
Oxygenation (children; note OI = Oxygenation Index and OSI = Oxygenation Index
using SpO2)
• Bilevel NIV or CPAP ≥5 cm H2O via full face mask: PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 300 mmHg
or SpO2/FiO2 ≤264
• Mild ARDS (invasively ventilated): 4 ≤ OI < 8 or 5 ≤ OSI < 7.5
• Moderate ARDS (invasively ventilated): 8 ≤ OI < 16 or 7.5 ≤ OSI < 12.3
• Severe ARDS (invasively ventilated): OI ≥ 16 or OSI ≥ 12.3
Sepsis Adults: life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response
to suspected or proven infection, with organ dysfunction. Signs of organ dysfunction
include: altered mental status, difficult or fast breathing, low oxygen saturation,
reduced urine output, fast heart rate, weak pulse, cold extremities or low blood
pressure, skin mottling, or laboratory evidence of coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia,
acidosis, high lactate or hyperbilirubinemia.
Children: suspected or proven infection and ≥2 SIRS criteria, of which one must be
abnormal temperature or white blood cell count
Septic
Shock
Adults: persisting hypotension despite volume resuscitation, requiring vasopressors
to maintain MAP ≥65 mmHg and serum lactate level < 2 mmol/L
Children: any hypotension (SBP <5th centile or >2 SD below normal for age) or 2-
3 of the following: altered mental state; bradycardia or tachycardia (HR <90 bpm or
>160 bpm in infants and HR <70 bpm or >150 bpm in children); prolonged
4
capillary refill (>2 sec) or warm vasodilation with bounding pulses; tachypnea;
mottled skin or petechial or purpuric rash; increased lactate; oliguria; hyperthermia
or hypothermia
3. Immediate implementation of appropriate IPC measures
Infection prevention control (IPC) is a critical and integral part of clinical management of patients
and should be initiated at the point of entry of the patient to hospital (typically the Emergency
Department). Standard precautions should always be routinely applied in all areas of health care
facilities. Standard precautions include hand hygiene; use of PPE to avoid direct contact with
patients’ blood, body fluids, secretions (including respiratory secretions) and non-intact skin.
Standard precautions also include prevention of needle-stick or sharps injury; safe waste
management; cleaning and disinfection of equipment; and cleaning of the environment.
Table 2: How to implement infection prevention and control measures for patients with suspected
or confirmed COVID - 19 infection
At triage
• Give suspect patient a triple layer surgical mask and direct patient to separate
area, an isolation room if available. Keep at least 1meter distance between
suspected patients and other patients. Instruct all patients to cover nose and
mouth during coughing or sneezing with tissue or flexed elbow for others.
Perform hand hygiene after contact with respiratory secretions
Apply droplet
precautions
• Droplet precautions prevent large droplet transmission of respiratory viruses.
Use a triple layer surgical mask if working within 1-2 metres of the patient.
Place patients in single rooms, or group together those with the same etiological
diagnosis. If an etiological diagnosis is not possible, group patients with similar
clinical diagnosis and based on epidemiological risk factors, with a spatial
separation. When providing care in close contact with a patient with respiratory
symptoms (e.g. coughing or sneezing), use eye protection (face-mask or
goggles), because sprays of secretions may occur. Limit patient movement
within the institution and ensure that patients wear triple layer surgical masks
when outside their rooms
5
Apply contact
precautions
• Droplet and contact precautions prevent direct or indirect transmission from
contact with contaminated surfaces or equipment (i.e. contact with
contaminated oxygen tubing/interfaces). Use PPE (triple layer surgical mask,
eye protection, gloves and gown) when entering room and remove PPE when
leaving. If possible, use either disposable or dedicated equipment (e.g.
stethoscopes, blood pressure cuffs and thermometers). If equipment needs to
be shared among patients, clean and disinfect between each patient use. Ensure
that health care workers refrain from touching their eyes, nose, and mouth with
potentially contaminated gloved or ungloved hands. Avoid contaminating
environmental surfaces that are not directly related to patient care (e.g. door
handles and light switches). Ensure adequate room ventilation. Avoid
movement of patients or transport. Perform hand hygiene.
Apply airborne
precautions
when
performing an
aerosol
generating
procedure
• Ensure that healthcare workers performing aerosol-generating procedures (i.e.
open suctioning of respiratory tract, intubation, bronchoscopy,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation) use PPE, including gloves, long-sleeved
gowns, eye protection, and fit-tested particulate respirators (N95). (The
scheduled fit test should not be confused with user seal check before each use.)
Whenever possible, use adequately ventilated single rooms when performing
aerosol-generating procedures, meaning negative pressure rooms with
minimum of 12 air changes per hour or at least 160 litres/second/patient in
facilities with natural ventilation. Avoid the presence of unnecessary
individuals in the room. Care for the patient in the same type of room after
mechanical ventilation commences
Abbreviations: ARI, acute respiratory infection; PPE, personal protective equipment
6
4. Laboratory diagnosis
Guidance on specimen collection, processing, transportation, including related biosafety
procedures, is available on https://mohfw.gov.in/media/disease-alerts.
As per directive from MoHFW, Government of India, all suspected cases are to be reported to
district and state surveillance officers.
Figure 1: Helpline for COVID-19 (MOHFW, GOI)
Sample collection:
Preferred sample: Throat and nasal swab in viral transport media (VTM) and transported on ice
Alternate: Nasopharyngeal swab, BAL or endotracheal aspirate which has to be mixed with the
viral transport medium and transported on ice
General guidelines:
• Trained health care professionals to wear appropriate PPE with latex free purple nitrile
gloves while collecting the sample from the patient. Maintain proper infection
control when collecting specimens
• Restricted entry to visitors or attendants during sample collection
• Complete the requisition form for each specimen submitted
• Proper disposal of all waste generated
Respiratory specimen collection methods:
A. Lower respiratory tract
• Bronchoalveolar lavage, tracheal aspirate, sputum
• Collect 2-3 mL into a sterile, leak-proof, screw-cap sputum collection cup or sterile
dry container.
7
B. Upper respiratory tract
• Nasopharyngeal swab AND oropharyngeal swab
Oropharyngeal swab (e.g. throat swab): Tilt patient’s head back 70 degrees. Rub swab over
both tonsillar pillars and posterior oropharynx and avoid touching the tongue, teeth, and
gums. Use only synthetic fiber swabs with plastic shafts. Do not use calcium alginate swabs
or swabs with wooden shafts. Place swabs immediately into sterile tubes containing 2-3 ml
of viral transport media.
Combined nasal & throat swab: Tilt patient’s head back 70 degrees. While gently rotating
the swab, insert swab less than one inch into nostril (until resistance is met at turbinates).
Rotate the swab several times against nasal wall and repeat in other nostril using the same
swab. Place tip of the swab into sterile viral transport media tube and cut off the applicator
stick. For throat swab, take a second dry polyester swab, insert into mouth, and swab the
posterior pharynx and tonsillar areas (avoid the tongue). Place tip of swab into the same
tube and cut off the applicator tip.
Nasopharyngeal swab: Tilt patient’s head back 70 degrees. Insert flexible swab through the
nares parallel to the palate (not upwards) until resistance is encountered or the distance is
equivalent to that from the ear to the nostril of the patient. Gently, rub and roll the swab.
Leave the swab in place for several seconds to absorb secretions before removing.
Clinicians may also collect lower respiratory tract samples when these are readily available
(for example, in mechanically ventilated patients). In hospitalized patients with confirmed
COVID - 19 infection, repeat upper respiratory tract samples should be collected to
demonstrate viral clearance.
8
5. Early supportive therapy and monitoring
a. Give supplemental oxygen therapy immediately to patients with SARI and respiratory distress,
hypoxaemia, or shock: Initiate oxygen therapy at 5 L/min and titrate flow rates to reach target
SpO2 ≥90% in non-pregnant adults and SpO2 ≥92-95 % in pregnant patients. Children with
emergency signs (obstructed or absent breathing, severe respiratory distress, central cyanosis,
shock, coma or convulsions) should receive oxygen therapy during resuscitation to target SpO2
≥94%; otherwise, the target SpO2 is ≥90%. All areas where patients with SARI are cared for
should be equipped with pulse oximeters, functioning oxygen systems and disposable, single-
use, oxygen-delivering interfaces (nasal cannula, simple face mask, and mask with reservoir
bag). Use contact precautions when handling contaminated oxygen interfaces of patients with
COVID – 19.
b. Use conservative fluid management in patients with SARI when there is no evidence of shock:
Patients with SARI should be treated cautiously with intravenous fluids, because aggressive
fluid resuscitation may worsen oxygenation, especially in settings where there is limited
availability of mechanical ventilation.
c. Give empiric antimicrobials to treat all likely pathogens causing SARI. Give antimicrobials
within one hour of initial patient assessment for patients with sepsis: Although the patient may
be suspected to have COVID - 19, Administer appropriate empiric antimicrobials within ONE
hour of identification of sepsis. Empirical antibiotic treatment should be based on the clinical
diagnosis (community-acquired pneumonia, health care-associated pneumonia [if infection
was acquired in healthcare setting], or sepsis), local epidemiology and susceptibility data, and
treatment guidelines. Empirical therapy includes a neuraminidase inhibitor for treatment of
influenza when there is local circulation or other risk factors, including travel history or
exposure to animal influenza viruses. Empirical therapy should be de-escalated on the basis
of microbiology results and clinical judgment
d. Do not routinely give systemic corticosteroids for treatment of viral pneumonia or ARDS
outside of clinical trials unless they are indicated for another reason: A systematic review of
observational studies of corticosteroids administered to patients with SARS reported no
survival benefit and possible harms (avascular necrosis, psychosis, diabetes, and delayedviral
clearance). A systematic review of observational studies in influenza found a higher risk of
mortality and secondary infections with corticosteroids; the evidence was judged as very low
9
to low quality due to confounding by indication. A subsequent study that addressed this
limitation by adjusting for time-varying confounders found no effect on mortality. Finally, a
recent study of patients receiving corticosteroids for MERS used a similar statistical approach
and found no effect of corticosteroids on mortality but delayed lower respiratory tract (LRT)
clearance of MERS-CoV. Given lack of effectiveness and possible harm, routine
corticosteroids should be avoided unless they are indicated for another reason. See section F
for the use of corticosteroids in sepsis.
e. Closely monitor patients with SARI for signs of clinical deterioration, such as rapidly
progressive respiratory failure and sepsis, and apply supportive care interventions
immediately: Application of timely, effective, and safe supportive therapies is thecornerstone
of therapy for patients that develop severe manifestations of COVID – 19.
f. Understand the patient’s co-morbid condition(s) to tailor the management of critical illness
and appreciate the prognosis: During intensive care management of SARI, determine which
chronic therapies should be continued and which therapies should be stopped temporarily.
g. Communicate early with patient and family: Communicate pro-actively with patients and
families and provide support and prognostic information. Understand the patient’s values and
preferences regarding life-sustaining interventions.
10
6. Management of hypoxemic respiratory failure and ARDS
• Recognize severe hypoxemic respiratory failure when a patient with respiratory distress is
failing standard oxygen therapy. Patients may continue to have increased work of breathing or
hypoxemia even when oxygen is delivered via a face mask with reservoir bag (flow rates of
10-15 L/min, which is typically the minimum flow required to maintain bag inflation; FiO2
0.60-0.95). Hypoxemic respiratory failure in ARDS commonly results from intrapulmonary
ventilation-perfusion mismatch or shunt and usually requires mechanical ventilation.
• High – flow nasal catheter oxygenation or non – invasive mechanical ventilation: When
respiratory distress and/or hypoxemia of the patient cannot be alleviated after receiving
standard oxygen therapy, high – flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy or non – invasive
ventilation can be considered. If conditions do not improve or even get worse within a short
time (1 – 2 hours), tracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation should be used in a
timely manner. Compared to standard oxygen therapy, HFNO reduces the need for intubation.
Patients with hypercapnia (exacerbation of obstructive lung disease, cardiogenic pulmonary
oedema), hemodynamic instability, multi-organ failure, or abnormal mental status should
generally not receive HFNO, although emerging data suggest that HFNO may be safe in
patients with mild-moderate and non-worsening hypercapnia25
. Patients receiving HFNO
should be in a monitored setting and cared for by experienced personnel capable of
endotracheal intubation in case the patient acutely deteriorates or does not improve after a short
trial (about 1 hr).
• NIV guidelines make no recommendation on use in hypoxemic respiratory failure (apart from
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema and post-operative respiratory failure) or pandemic viral
illness (referring to studies of SARS and pandemic influenza). Risks include delayed
intubation, large tidal volumes, and injurious transpulmonary pressures. Limited data suggest
a high failure rate when MERS patients received NIV. Patients receiving a trial of NIV should
be in a monitored setting and cared for by experienced personnel capable of endotracheal
intubation in case the patient acutely deteriorates or does not improve after a short trial (about
1 hr). Patients with hemodynamic instability, multiorgan failure, or abnormal mental status
should not receive NIV.
11
• Recent publications suggest that newer HFNO and NIV systems with good interface fitting do
not create widespread dispersion of exhaled air and therefore should be associated with low
risk of airborne transmission.
• Endotracheal intubation should be performed by a trained and experienced provider using
airborne precautions. Patients with ARDS, especially young children or those who are obese
or pregnant, may de-saturate quickly during intubation. Pre-oxygenate with 100% FiO2 for 5
minutes, via a face mask with reservoir bag, bag-valve mask, HFNO, or NIV. Rapidsequence
intubation is appropriate after an airway assessment that identifies no signs of difficult
intubation.
• Implement mechanical ventilation using lower tidal volumes (4–8 ml/kg predicted body
weight, PBW) and lower inspiratory pressures (plateau pressure <30 cmH2O). This is astrong
recommendation from a clinical guideline for patients with ARDS, and is suggested for
patients with sepsis-induced respiratory failure. The initial tidal volume is 6 ml/kg PBW; tidal
volume up to 8 ml/kg PBW is allowed if undesirable side effects occur (e.g. dyssynchrony, pH
<7.15). Hypercapnia is permitted if meeting the pH goal of 7.30-7.45. Ventilator protocols are
available. The use of deep sedation may be required to control respiratory drive and achieve
tidal volume targets.
• In patients with severe ARDS, prone ventilation for >12 hours per day is recommended.
Application of prone ventilation is strongly recommended for adult and paediatric patients with
severe ARDS but requires sufficient human resources and expertise to be performed safely.
• Use a conservative fluid management strategy for ARDS patients without tissue
hypoperfusion.
• In patients with moderate or severe ARDS, higher PEEP instead of lower PEEP is
suggested.PEEP titration requires consideration of benefits (reducing atelectrauma and
improving alveolar recruitment) vs. risks (end-inspiratory overdistension leading to lung injury
and higher pulmonary vascular resistance). Tables are available to guide PEEP titration based
on the FiO2 required to maintain SpO2. A related intervention of recruitment manoeuvres
(RMs) is delivered as episodic periods of high continuous positive airway pressure [30–40 cm
H2O], progressive incremental increases in PEEP with constant driving pressure, or high
driving pressure; considerations of benefits vs. risks are similar. Higher PEEP and RMs were
both conditionally recommended in a clinical practice guideline. In patients with moderate-
12
severe ARDS (PaO2/FiO2<150), neuromuscular blockade by continuous infusion should not
be routinely used.
• In settings with access to expertise in extracorporeal life support (ECLS), consider referral of
patients with refractory hypoxemia despite lung protective ventilation. ECLS should only be
offered in expert centres with a sufficient case volume to maintain expertise and that can apply
the IPC measures required for COVID – 19 patients
• Avoid disconnecting the patient from the ventilator, which results in loss of PEEP and
atelectasis. Use in-line catheters for airway suctioning and clamp endotracheal tube when
disconnection is required (for example, transfer to a transport ventilator)
13
7. Management of septic shock
• Recognize septic shock in adults when infection is suspected or confirmed AND vasopressors
are needed to maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP) ≥65 mmHg AND lactate is < 2 mmol/L,
in absence of hypovolemia. Recognize septic shock in children with any hypotension (systolic
blood pressure [SBP] <5th centile or >2 SD below normal for age) or 2-3 of the following:
altered mental state; tachycardia or bradycardia (HR <90 bpm or >160 bpm in infants and HR
<70 bpm or >150 bpm in children); prolonged capillary refill (>2 sec) or warm vasodilation
with bounding pulses; tachypnea; mottled skin or petechial or purpuric rash; increased lactate;
oliguria; hyperthermia or hypothermia.
• In the absence of a lactate measurement, use MAP and clinical signs of perfusion to define
shock. Standard care includes early recognition and the following treatments within 1 hour of
recognition: antimicrobial therapy and fluid loading and vasopressors for hypotension. The use
of central venous and arterial catheters should be based on resource availability and individual
patient needs. Detailed guidelines are available for the management of septic shock in adults
and children.
• In resuscitation from septic shock in adults, give at least 30 ml/kg of isotonic crystalloid in
adults in the first 3 hours. In resuscitation from septic shock in children in well-resourced
settings, give 20 ml/kg as a rapid bolus and up to 40-60 ml/kg in the first 1 hr. Do not use
hypotonic crystalloids, starches, or gelatins for resuscitation.
• Fluid resuscitation may lead to volume overload, including respiratory failure. If there is no
response to fluid loading and signs of volume overload appear (for example, jugular venous
distension, crackles on lung auscultation, pulmonary oedema on imaging, or hepatomegaly in
children), then reduce or discontinue fluid administration. This step is particularly important
where mechanical ventilation is not available. Alternate fluid regimens are suggested when
caring for children in resource-limited settings.
• Crystalloids include normal saline and Ringer’s lactate. Determine need for additional fluid
boluses (250-1000 ml in adults or 10-20 ml/kg in children) based on clinical response and
improvement of perfusion targets. Perfusion targets include MAP (>65 mmHg or age-
appropriate targets in children), urine output (>0.5 ml/kg/hr in adults, 1 ml/kg/hr in children),
and improvement of skin mottling, capillary refill, level of consciousness, and lactate. Consider
14
dynamic indices of volume responsiveness to guide volume administration beyond initial
resuscitation based on local resources and experience. These indices include passive leg raises,
fluid challenges with serial stroke volume measurements, or variations in systolic pressure,
pulse pressure, inferior vena cava size, or stroke volume in response to changes in intrathoracic
pressure during mechanical ventilation.
• Administer vasopressors when shock persists during or after fluid resuscitation. The
initial blood pressure target is MAP ≥65 mmHg in adults and age-appropriate targets in
children.
• If central venous catheters are not available, vasopressors can be given through a peripheral
IV, but use a large vein and closely monitor for signs of extravasation and local tissue necrosis.
If extravasation occurs, stop infusion. Vasopressors can also be administered through
intraosseous needles.
• If signs of poor perfusion and cardiac dysfunction persist despite achieving MAP target with
fluids and vasopressors, consider an inotrope such as dobutamine
15
8. Other therapeutic measures:
For patients with progressive deterioration of oxygenation indicators, rapid worsening on imaging
and excessive activation of the body’s inflammatory response, glucocorticoids can be used for a
short period of time (3 to 5 days). It is recommended that dose should not exceed the equivalent
of methylprednisolone 1 – 2mg/kg/day. Note that a larger dose of glucocorticoid will delay the
removal of coronavirus due to immunosuppressive effects. For pregnant severe and critical cases,
pregnancy should be preferably terminated. Consultations with obstetric, neonatal, and intensive
care specialists (depending on the condition of the mother) are essential. Patients often suffer from
anxiety and fear and they should be supported by psychological counseling.
16
9. Prevention of complications
Implement the following interventions (Table 3) to prevent complications associated with critical
illness. These interventions are based on Surviving Sepsis or other guidelines, and are generally
limited to feasible recommendations based on high quality evidence.
Table 3: Prevention of complications
Anticipated
Outcome
Interventions
Reduce days of
invasive
mechanical
ventilation
• Use weaning protocols that include daily assessment for readiness to
breathe spontaneously
• Minimize continuous or intermittent sedation, targeting specific titration
endpoints (light sedation unless contraindicated) or with daily interruption
of continuous sedative infusions
Reduce incidence
of ventilator
associated
pneumonia
• Oral intubation is preferable to nasal intubation in adolescents and adults
• Keep patient in semi-recumbent position (head of bed elevation 30-45º)
• Use a closed suctioning system; periodically drain and discard condensate
in tubing
• Use a new ventilator circuit for each patient; once patient is ventilated,
change circuit if it is soiled or damaged but not routinely
• Change heat moisture exchanger when it malfunctions, when soiled, or
every 5–7 days
Reduce incidence
of venous
thromboembolism
• Use pharmacological prophylaxis (low molecular-weight heparin[preferred
if available] or heparin 5000 units subcutaneously twice daily) in
adolescents and adults without contraindications. For those with
contraindications, use mechanical prophylaxis (intermittent pneumatic
compression devices).
Reduce incidence
of catheter related
bloodstream
infection
• Use a checklist with completion verified by a real-time observer as reminder
of each step needed for sterile insertion and as a daily reminder to remove
catheter if no longer needed
Reduce incidence
of pressure
• Turn patient every two hours
17
Ulcers
Reduce incidence
of stress ulcers
and
gastrointestinal
bleeding
• Give early enteral nutrition (within 24–48 hours of admission)
• Administer histamine-2 receptor blockers or proton-pump inhibitors in
patients with risk factors for GI bleeding. Risk factors for gastrointestinal
bleeding include mechanical ventilation for ≥48 hours, coagulopathy, renal
replacement therapy, liver disease, multiple co-morbidities, and higher
organ failure score
Reduce incidence
of ICU-related
weakness
• Actively mobilize the patient early in the course of illness when safe todo
so
18
10. Specific therapy
NO SPECIFIC ANTIVIRALS have been proven to be effective as per currently available data.
However, based on the available information (uncontrolled clinical trials), the following drugs may
be considered as an off – label indication in patients with severe disease and requiring ICU
management:
• Hydroxychloroquine (Dose 400mg BD – for 1 day followed by 200mg BD for 4 days)
In combination with
• Azithromycin (500 mg OD for 5 days)
These drugs should be administered under close medical supervision, with monitoring for side
effects including QTc interval.
The above medication is presently not recommended for children less than 12 years, pregnant
and lactating women.
These guidelines are based on currently available information and would be reviewed from
time to time as new evidence emerges.
Support to Treating Physicians: AIIMS, New Delhi is running a 24x7 helpline to provide
support to the treating physicians on clinical management. The helpline number is
9971876591. The identified nodal doctor of the State, appointed for clinical management of
COVID – 19 should only contact AIIMS Call Centre.
