HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 10th of April 2020, 50 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,473.
• Of the newly reported cases, three cases were identified in
people returning from outside Thailand.
• To reduce transmission from imported cases, all persons
returning from other countries will be quarantined in state-
arranged venues.
• An additional four healthcare workers are included in the newly
reported cases, bringing the total number to 84 (3.4% of all
cases).
• To protect healthcare workers and the healthcare system, it is essential that everyone complies with
measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
• A total of 27 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed cases, mainly among family
members. Five of the new cases are reported in individuals whose work brings them into contact with large
numbers of people.
• 68 of 77 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,473 confirmed (50 new)
33 deaths (1 new)
1,427 people hospitalized
84 healthcare staff infected (4 new)
36 severe cases
1,103 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 10 April 2020
UPDATE ON MEASURES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND:
• The Ministry of Education has announced that all Thai schools are required to postpone the start of
the next term to the 1st of July and to provide learning arrangements to suit the emergency context.
• Bangkok and 11 provinces have banned the sale of alcohol from April 10th
to 20th
to reduce the risk of
social gatherings at home or in a community.
• The Department of Health Services supports 1.04 million community health volunteers (CHVs)
nationwide to help educate, communicate and enforce social distancing measures. To date, around 9
million households have been visited to deliver these important messages.
KEY MESSAGES FROM THE NEW WHO GUIDANCE ON FACE MASKS IN THE COMMUNITY:
• It is critical that medical masks and respirators be prioritized for health care workers.
• The use of nonmedical masks made of other materials (e.g., cotton fabric) in the community setting
has not been well evaluated. There is no current evidence to make a recommendation for or against
their use in this setting.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides information / advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
Protecting yourself and your loved ones over Songkran
• The government of Thailand has strongly advised
against travel at this time.
• Greetings and well-wishes should be sent through
phone calls or online channels.
• For those staying in the same house with their
parents, please practice physical distancing when
paying respects.
• Gifts to parents and grandparents should be
delivered through available logistics services, not
in person.
