Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance on shielding and protecting people
defined on medical grounds as extremely vulnerable
from COVID-19
Updated 30 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance on shielding and protecting people defined on medical grounds as extremely vulnerable
Public Health
England
Contents
Background and scope of guidance
What do we mean by extremely vulnerable?
What you need to know
How do these measures differ from the social distancing guidance for vulnerable people issued?
Symptoms
What is shielding?
Handwashing and respiratory hygiene
Background and scope of guidance
This guidance is for people, including children, who are at very high risk of severe illness from coronavirus (COVID-19)
because of an underlying health condition, and for their family, friends and carers. It is intended for use in situations where
the extremely vulnerable person is living in their own home, with or without additional support. This includes the extremely
clinically vulnerable people living in long-term care facilities, either for the elderly or persons with special needs.
Shielding is a measure to protect people who are clinically extremely vulnerable by minimising all interaction between
those who are extremely vulnerable and others. We are strongly advising people with serious underlying health conditions
(listed below), which put them at very high risk of severe illness from coronavirus (COVID-19), to rigorously follow
shielding measures in order to keep themselves safe.
What do we mean by extremely vulnerable?
People falling into this extremely vulnerable group include:
1. Solid organ transplant recipients.
2. People with specific cancers:
people with cancer who are undergoing active chemotherapy
people with lung cancer who are undergoing radical radiotherapy
people with cancers of the blood or bone marrow such as leukaemia, lymphoma or myeloma who are at any stage of
treatment
people having immunotherapy or other continuing antibody treatments for cancer
people having other targeted cancer treatments which can affect the immune system, such as protein kinase
inhibitors or PARP inhibitors
people who have had bone marrow or stem cell transplants in the last 6 months, or who are still taking
immunosuppression drugs
3. People with severe respiratory conditions including all cystic fibrosis, severe asthma and severe COPD.
4. People with rare diseases and inborn errors of metabolism that significantly increase the risk of infections (such as
SCID, homozygous sickle cell).
5. People on immunosuppression therapies sufficient to significantly increase risk of infection.
6. Women who are pregnant with significant heart disease, congenital or acquired.
Shielding is for your personal protection. It is your choice to decide whether to follow the measures we advise. Individuals
who have been given a prognosis of less than 6 months to live, and some others in special circumstances, could decide
not to undertake shielding. This will be a deeply personal decision. We advise calling your GP or specialist to discuss this.
The NHS in England is directly contacting people with these conditions to provide further advice.
If you think you fall into one of the categories of extremely vulnerable people listed above and you have not received a
letter or been contacted by your GP, you should discuss your concerns with yourGP or hospital clinician.
We understand this is an anxious time and people considered extremely vulnerable will understandably have questions
and concerns. Plans are being readied to make sure you can rely on a wide range of help and support.
What you need to know
If you have an underlying health condition listed above, you are at very high risk of severe illness as a result of coronavirus
(COVID-19) requiring admission to hospital.
What should you do if you develop symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19)?
How can you get assistance with foods and medicines if you are shielding?
What should you do if you have hospital and GP appointments during this period?
What is the advice for visitors, including those who are providing care for you?
What is the advice for informal carers who provide care for someone who is extremely vulnerable?
How do you look after your mental wellbeing?
What steps can you take to stay connected with family and friends during this time?
What is the advice for people living in long-term care facilities, either for the elderly or persons with special needs?
What is the advice for parents and schools with extremely vulnerable children?
Shielding is a practice used to protect extremely vulnerable people from coming into contact with coronavirus.
You are strongly advised to stay at home at all times and avoid any face-to-face contact for a period of at least 12 weeks
from the day you receive your letter. Please note that this period of time could change.
Visits from people who provide essential support to you such as healthcare, personal support with your daily needs or
social care should continue, but carers and care workers must stay away if they have any of the symptoms of coronavirus
(COVID-19). You may find this guidance on home care provision useful. All people coming to your home should wash their
hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds on arrival to your house and often while they are there.
You should have an alternative list of people who can help you with your care if your main carer becomes unwell. You can
also contact your local council for advice on how to access care.
If you think you have developed symptoms of COVID-19 such as a new, continuous cough or fever, seek clinical advice
using the NHS 111 online coronavirus service or call NHS 111. Do this as soon as you get symptoms.
If you have someone else living with you, they are not required to adopt these protective shielding measures for
themselves. They should do what they can to support you in shielding and they should stringently follow guidance on
social distancing, reducing their contact outside the home. If you care for but don’t actually live with someone who is
extremely vulnerable, you should still stringently follow guidance on social distancing.
How do these measures differ from the social distancing guidance for
vulnerable people issued?
You are strongly advised to stay at home at all times for a period of at least 12 weeks from the day you receive your letter.
Avoid going out for food and medicine. Ask a friend, neighbour or family member to bring your supplies where possible.
Symptoms
The most common symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) are recent onset of:
new continuous cough and/or
high temperature (above 37.8 °C)
What is shielding?
Shielding is a measure to protect extremely vulnerable people by minimising interaction between those who are extremely
vulnerable and others. This means that those who are extremely vulnerable should not leave their homes, and within their
homes should minimise all non-essential contact with other members of their household. This is to protect those who are
at very high risk of severe illness from coronavirus (COVID-19) from coming into contact with the virus.
If you think you have a condition which makes you extremely vulnerable or have received a letter from NHS England you
are strongly advised to shield yourself, to reduce the chance of getting coronavirus (COVID-19) and follow the face-to-face
distancing measures below.
The measures are:
1. Strictly avoid contact with someone who is displaying symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19). These symptoms include
high temperature and/or new and continuous cough.
2. Do not leave your house.
3. Do not attend any gatherings. This includes gatherings of friends and families in private spaces, for example, family
homes, weddings and religious services.
4. Do not go out for shopping, leisure or travel and, when arranging food or medication deliveries, these should be left at
the door to minimise contact.
5. Keep in touch using remote technology such as phone, internet, and social media.
Do use telephone or online services to contact yourGP or other essential services.
We know that stopping these activities will be difficult. You should try to identify ways of staying in touch with others and
participating in your normal activities remotely from your home. However, you must not participate in alternative activities if
they involve any contact with other people.
This advice will be in place for at least 12 weeks from the day you receive your letter.
What should you do if you have someone else living with you?
While the rest of your household are not required to adopt these protective shielding measures for themselves, we would
expect them to do what they can to support you in shielding and to stringently follow guidance on social distancing.
1. Minimise as much as possible the time other family members spend in shared spaces such as kitchens, bathrooms and
sitting areas, and keep shared spaces well ventilated.
2. Aim to keep 2 metres (3 steps) away from people you live with and encourage them to sleep in a different bed where
possible. If you can, you should use a separate bathroom from the rest of the household. Make sure you use separate
towels from the other people in your house, both for drying themselves after bathing or showering and for hand-hygiene
purposes.
3. If you do share a toilet and bathroom with others, it is important that they are cleaned after use every time (for example,
wiping surfaces you have come into contact with). Another tip is to consider drawing up a rota for bathing, with you
using the facilities first.
4. If you share a kitchen with others, avoid using it while they are present. If you can, you should take your meals back to
your room to eat. If you have one, use a dishwasher to clean and dry the family’s used crockery and cutlery. If this is
not possible, wash them using your usual washing up liquid and warm water and dry them thoroughly. If you are using
your own utensils, remember to use a separate tea towel for drying these.
5. We understand that it will be difficult for some people to separate themselves from others at home. You should do your
very best to follow this guidance and everyone in your household should regularly wash their hands, avoid touching
their face, and clean frequently touched surfaces.
If the rest of your household stringently follow advice on social distancing and minimise the risk of spreading the virus
within the home by following the advice above, there is no need for them to also shield alongside you.
Handwashing and respiratory hygiene
There are general principles you should follow to help prevent the spread of airway and chest infections caused by
respiratory viruses, including:
wash your hands more often - with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use a hand sanitiser. Do this after you
blow your nose, sneeze or cough, and after you eat or handle food
avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands
avoid close contact with people who have symptoms
cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue, then throw the tissue in a bin
clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces in the home
What should you do if you develop symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19)?
If you develop symptoms of COVID-19 (high temperature above 37.8 °C and/or new and continuous cough), seek clinical
advice using the NHS 111 online coronavirus service or call NHS 111 if you don’t have internet access. Do this as soon as
you get symptoms. In an emergency, call 999 if you are seriously ill. Do not visit the GP, pharmacy, urgent care centre or
a hospital.
To help the NHS provide you with the best care if you need to go to hospital as a result of catching coronavirus, we ask
that you prepare a single hospital bag. This should include your emergency contact, a list of the medications you take
(including dose and frequency), any information on your planned care appointments and things you would need for an
overnight stay (snacks, pyjamas, toothbrush, medication and so on). If you have an advanced care plan, please include
that.
How can you get assistance with foods and medicines if you are shielding?
Ask family, friends and neighbours to support you and use online services. If this is not possible, then the public sector,
business, charities and the general public are gearing up to help those advised to stay at home. Please discuss your daily
needs during this period of staying at home with carers, family, friends, neighbours or local community groups to see how
they can support you. Please visit gov.uk/coronavirus-extremely-vulnerable to register for the support that you need. This
includes help with food, shopping deliveries and additional care you might need.
The government is helping pharmacies to deliver prescriptions. Prescriptions will continue to cover the same length of
time as usual. If you do not currently have your prescriptions collected or delivered, you can arrange this by:
1. Asking someone who can pick up your prescription from the local pharmacy (this is the best option, if possible).
2. Contacting your pharmacy to ask them to help you find a volunteer (who will have been ID checked) or deliver it to you.
You may also need to arrange for collection or delivery of hospital specialist medication that is prescribed to you by your
hospital care team.
If you receive support from health and social care organisations, for example, if you have care provided for you through
the local authority or health care system, this will continue as normal. Your health or social care provider will be asked to
take additional precautions to make sure that you are protected. The advice for formal carers is included in the home care
provision.
What should you do if you have hospital and GP appointments during this
period?
We advise everyone to access medical assistance remotely, wherever possible. However, if you have a scheduled
hospital or other medical appointment during this period, talk to your GP or specialist to ensure you continue to receive the
care you need and determine which of these appointments are absolutely essential.
It is possible that your hospital may need to cancel or postpone some clinics and appointments. You should contact your
hospital or clinic to confirm appointments.
What is the advice for visitors, including those who are providing care for
you?
Contact regular visitors to your home, such as friends and family to let them know that you are shielding and that they
should not visit you during this time unless they are providing essential care for you. Essential care includes things like
help with washing, dressing or feeding.
If you receive regular health or social care from an organisation, either through your local authority or paid for by yourself,
inform your care providers that you are shielding and agree a plan for continuing your care.
If you receive essential care from friends or family members, speak to your carers about extra precautions they can take
to keep you safe. You may find this guidance on home care provision useful.
Speak to your carers about backup plans for your care in case your main carer is unwell and needs to self-isolate. If you
need help with care but you’re not sure who to contact, or if you do not have family or friends who can help you, you can
contact your local council who will be able to help you and assess any social care needs you might have. Please visit
gov.uk/coronavirus-extremely-vulnerable to register for the support that you need.
What is the advice for informal carers who provide care for someone who is
extremely vulnerable?
If you are caring for someone who is extremely vulnerable due to severe illness from COVID-19, there are some simple
steps that you can take to protect them and to reduce their risk at the current time. Ensure you follow advice on good
hygiene:
only care that is essential should be provided
wash your hands on arrival and often, using soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitiser
cover your mouth and nose with a tissue or your sleeve (not your hands) when you cough or sneeze
put used tissues in the bin immediately and wash your hands afterwards
do not visit or provide care if you are unwell and make alternative arrangements for their care
provide information on who they should call if they feel unwell, how to use NHS 111 online coronavirus service and
leave the number for NHS 111 prominently displayed
find out about different sources of support that could be used and accessing further advice on creating a contingency
plan is available from Carers UK
look after your own wellbeing and physical health during this time. Further information on thisis available.
How do you look after your mental wellbeing?
Social isolation, reduction in physical activity, unpredictability and changes in routine can all contribute to increasing
stress. Many people including those without existing mental health needs may feel anxious about this impact including
support with daily living, ongoing care arrangements with health providers, support with medication and changes in their
daily routines.
If you are receiving services for your mental health, learning disability or autism and are worried about the impact of
isolation please contact your key worker or care coordinator or provider to review your care plan. If you have additional
needs please contact your key worker or care coordinator to develop a safety or crisis plan.
Understandably, you may find that shielding and distancing can be boring or frustrating. You may find your mood and
feelings are affected and you may feel low, worried or have problems sleeping and you might miss being outside with
other people.
At times like these, it can be easy to fall into unhealthy patterns of behaviour which in turn can make you feel worse. There
are simple things you can do that may help, to stay mentally and physically active during this time such as:
look for ideas of exercises you can do at home on the NHS website
spend time doing things you enjoy – this might include reading, cooking, other indoor hobbies or listening to favourite
radio programmes or watching TV
try to eat healthy, well-balanced meals, drink enough water, exercise regularly, and try to avoid smoking, alcohol and
drugs
try spending time with the windows open to let in the fresh air, arranging space to sit and see a nice view (if possible)
and get some natural sunlight, or get out into any private space, keeping at least 2 metres away from your neighbours
and household members if you are sitting on your doorstep
Constantly watching the news can make you feel more worried. If you think it is affecting you, try to limit the time you
spend watching, reading, or listening to media coverage of the outbreak. It may help to only check the news at set times
or limit this to a couple of times a day.
Try to focus on the things you can control, such as your behaviour, who you speak to and who you get information from.
Every Mind Matters provides simple tips and advice to start taking better care of your mental health.
If you are struggling with your mental health, please see the NHS mental health and wellbeing advice website for self-
assessment, audio guides and tools that you can use. If you are still struggling after several weeks and it is affecting your
daily life, please contact NHS 111 online. If you have no internet access, you should call NHS 111.
What steps can you take to stay connected with family and friends during
this time?
Draw on support you might have through your friends, family and other networks during this time. Try to stay in touch with
those around you over the phone, by post or online. Let people know how you would like to stay in touch and build that
into your routine. This is also important in looking after your mental wellbeing and you may find it helpful to talk to them
about how you are feeling if you want to.
Remember, it is okay to share your concerns with others you trust and in doing so you may end up providing support to
them, too. Or you might want to try an NHS recommended helpline.
What is the advice for people living in long-term care facilities, either for the
elderly or persons with special needs?
The advice above also applies to extremely vulnerable persons living in long-term care facilities. Care providers should
carefully discuss this advice with the families, carers and specialist doctors caring for such persons to ensure this
guidance is strictly adhered to.
What is the advice for parents and schools with extremely vulnerable
children?
The advice above also applies to extremely vulnerable children in mainstream and special schools.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
