Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for employers and businesses on
coronavirus (COVID-19)
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for employees, employers and businesses
Department for
Business, Energy
& Industrial Strategy
Public Health
England
Contents
What you need to know
Background
Symptoms
Keeping your business open
What to do if someone develops symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) on site
Travel arrangements
What you need to know
businesses and workplaces should encourage their employees to work at home, wherever possible
if someone becomes unwell in the workplace with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature, they should be sent
home and advised to follow the advice to stay at home
employees should be reminded to wash their hands for 20 seconds more frequently and catch coughs and sneezes in
tissues
frequently clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are touched regularly, using your standard cleaning products
employees will need your support to adhere to the recommendation to stay at home to reduce the spread of
coronavirus (COVID-19) to others
those who follow advice to stay at home will be eligible for statutory sick pay (
SSP) from the first day of their absence
from work
employers should use their discretion concerning the need for medical evidence for certification for employees who are
unwell. This will allow GPs to focus on their patients
if evidence is required by an employer, those with symptoms of coronavirus can get an isolation note fromNHS 111
online, and those who live with someone that has symptoms can get a note from theNHS website
employees from defined vulnerable groups should be strongly advised and supported to stay at home and work from
there if possible
Background
This guidance will assist employers, businesses and their staff in addressing coronavirus (COVID-19).
This guidance may be updated in line with the changing situation.
It’s good practice for employers to:
keep everyone updated on actions being taken to reduce risks of exposure in the workplace
ensure employees who are in a vulnerable group are strongly advised to followsocial distancing guidance
make sure everyone’s contact numbers and emergency contact details are up to date
make sure managers know how to spot symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) and are clear on any relevant processes,
for example sickness reporting and sick pay, and procedures in case someone in the workplace is potentially infected
and needs to take the appropriate action
make sure there are places to wash hands for 20 seconds with soap and water, and encourage everyone to do so
regularly
provide hand sanitiser and tissues for staff, and encourage them to use them
Symptoms
The most common symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) are a new, continuous cough or a high temperature.
For most people, coronavirus (COVID-19) will be a mild infection.
Keeping your business open
With the exception ofsome non-essential shops and public venues, we are not asking any other businesses to close –
indeed it is important for business to carry on.
However, you should encourage your employees to work from home unless it is impossible for them to do so.
Sometimes this will not be possible, as not everyone can work from home. Certain jobs require people to travel to their
Sick pay
Certifying absence from work
What to do if an employee needs time off work to look after someone
Limiting spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) in business and workplaces
Cleaning and waste
Handling post or packages
place of work – for instance if they operate machinery, work in construction or manufacturing, or are delivering front line
services.
See the full guidance on work.
What to do if someone develops symptoms of coronavirus (COVID-19) on
site
If anyone becomes unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature in the business or workplace they should
be sent home and advised to follow the stay at home guidance.
If they need clinical advice, they should go online toNHS 111 or call 111 if they don’t have internet access. In an
emergency, call 999 if they are seriously ill or injured or their life is at risk. Do not visit the GP, pharmacy, urgent care
centre or a hospital.
If a member of staff has helped someone who was taken unwell with a new, continuous cough or a high temperature, they
do not need to go home unless they develop symptoms themselves. They should wash their hands thoroughly for 20
seconds after any contact with someone who is unwell with symptoms consistent with coronavirus infection.
It is not necessary to close the business or workplace or send any staff home, unless government policy changes. Keep
monitoring the government response page for the latest details.
Travel arrangements
Anyone who has a new, continuous cough or a high temperature should be advised to quickly and directly return home
and to remain there and initiate household isolation. If they have to use public transport, they should try to keep away from
other people and catch coughs and sneezes in a tissue.
Sick pay
Those who follow advice to stay at home and who cannot work as a result will be eligible for statutory sick pay (
SSP), even
if they are not themselves sick.
Employers should use their discretion and respect the medical need to self-isolate in making decisions about sick pay.
Anyone not eligible to receive sick pay, including those earning less than an average of £118 per week, some of those
working in the gig economy, or self-employed people, is able to claim Universal Credit and or contributory Employment
and Support Allowance.
For those on a low income and already claiming Universal Credit, it is designed to automatically adjust depending on
people’s earnings or other income. However, if someone needs money urgently they can apply for an advance through the
journal.
Certifying absence from work
By law, medical evidence is not required for the first 7 days of sickness. After 7 days, employers may use their discretion
around the need for medical evidence if an employee is staying at home.
We strongly suggest that employers use their discretion around the need for medical evidence for a period of absence
where an employee is advised to stay at home either as they are unwell themselves, or live with someone who is, in
accordance with the public health advice issued by the government.
If evidence is required to coverself-isolation or household isolation beyond the first 7 days of absence then employees
can get an isolation note from NHS 111 online or from theNHS website.
What to do if an employee needs time off work to look after someone
Employees are entitled to time off work to help someone who depends on them (a ‘dependant’) in an unexpected event or
emergency. This would apply to situations related to coronavirus (COVID-19). For example:
if they have children they need to look after or arrange childcare for because their school has closed
to help their child or another dependant if they’re sick, or need to go into isolation or hospital
There’s no statutory right to pay for this time off, but some employers might offer pay depending on the contract or
workplace policy.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
ACAS has more information on coronavirus and can help with specific queries by phone.
Limiting spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) in business and workplaces
Businesses and employers can help reduce the spread of coronavirus (COVID-19) by reminding everyone of the public
health advice. Posters, leaflets and other materials are available.
Employees and customers should be reminded to wash their hands for 20 seconds more frequently than normal.
Frequently clean and disinfect objects and surfaces that are touched regularly, using your standard cleaning products.
Cleaning and waste
See the guidance on cleaning and waste.
Handling post or packages
Staff should continue to follow existing risk assessments and safe systems of working; there are no additional precautions
needed for handling post or packages.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
