Department of Health and Social
Care
39 Victoria Street
London SW1H 0EU
Sarah Wilkinson
Chief Executive
NHS Digital
1 Trevelyan Square
Boar Lane
Leeds
LS1 6AE
17 March 2020
Dear Sarah,
Covid-19 – Notice under Regulation 3(4) of the Health Service Control of
Patient Information Regulations 2002
The health and social care system is taking action to manage and mitigate the spread
and impact of the current outbreak of Covid-19. Action to be taken will require the
sharing of confidential patient information amongst health organisations and other
appropriate bodies for the purposes of protecting public health, providing healthcare
services to the public and monitoring and managing the outbreak.
I am therefore writing to you to serve notice on the Health and Social Care Information
Centre, known as NHS Digital, under Regulation 3(4) of the Health Service Control of
Patient Information Regulations 2002 (COPI) to require NHS Digital to process
confidential patient information in the manner set out below for purposes set out in
Regulation 3(1) of COPI (insofar as those purposes relate to the current outbreak of
Covid-19).
1. Purpose of this Notice
The purpose of this Notice is to provide NHS Digital with the necessary statutory
power to disseminate confidential patient information to organisations permitted to
process confidential patient information under Regulation 3(3) of COPI for the
purposes set out in Regulation 3(1) of COPI to support the Secretary of State’s
response to Covid-19 (Covid-19 Purpose).
I consider this Notice is necessary so that NHS Digital can lawfully and efficiently
disseminate confidential patient information to those organisations set out in
Regulation 3(3) of COPI being persons employed or engaged for the purposes of
the health service or other persons employed or engaged by a Government
Department or other public authority in communicable disease surveillance in
connection with the health and social care system’s management of the response
to Covid-19.
2. Requirement to Disseminate Confidential Patient Information
2.1. I hereby provide NHS Digital with notice under Regulation 3(4) that, for the
purposes set out above, I require NHS Digital to disseminate confidential
patient information in respect of which it is a controller1, including that which
it has obtained by complying with a direction made under section 254 or a
request made under section 255 of the Health and Social Care Act 2012
(2012 Act), to a person or organisation permitted to process confidential
information under Regulation 3(3) of COPI.
2.2. NHS Digital is only required to disseminate such confidential patient
information where it is:
2.2.1. requested to do so by an authorised officer of the Department of
Health and Social Care acting on my behalf or requested to do so by
another organisation permitted to process confidential information
under Regulation 3(3) of COPI (the Requestor), and
2.2.2. reasonably satisfied that the confidential patient information to be
disclosed pursuant to the request is required by the Requestor for a
Covid-19 Purpose and will be processed by the Requestor or by a
processor2
on behalf of the Requestor, solely for that Covid-19
Purpose and in accordance with the restrictions set out in Regulation
7 of COPI; and
2.2.3. from the date of this notice for the period up to 30 September 2020.
3. Notification to Requesters
NHS Digital is requested when sharing confidential patient information under this
Notice:
3.1. to remind recipients of confidential patient information of their responsibilities
under COPI when processing the confidential patient information, including
1
As defined in Article 4(7) of the General Data Protection Regulation 2016
2
As defined in Article 4(8) of the General Data Protection Regulation 2016
the restrictions which apply to their processing of it under Regulation 7 of
COPI; and
3.2. to publish details of the organisations with whom it has shared confidential
patient information under this Notice and the purposes for which it was
shared in the NHS Digital Data Release Register3
.
4. Review and Expiry of this Notice
This Notice will be reviewed on or before 30 September 2020 and may be extended
by me by further notice in writing for the period specified in that notice. If no further
notice is sent to you by me, this Notice will expire on 30 September 2020.
I am grateful for your continued support at this critical time for the nation.
Yours sincerely
On behalf of
Secretary of State for Health and Social Care
3
https://digital.nhs.uk/services/data-access-request-service-dars/register-of-approved-data-releases
