HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 8th of April 2020, 111 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,369.
• Of the newly reported cases, 42 cases were identified in people
returning from a religious gathering in Indonesia.
• To reduce transmission from imported cases, all persons
returning from other countries will be quarantined in state-
arranged venues.
• An additional two healthcare workers are included in the newly
reported cases, bringing the total number of healthcare workers
infected with COVID-19 to 55. To protect healthcare workers and the healthcare system, it is essential that
everyone complies with measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
• A total of 37 of the new cases are close contacts of previously confirmed cases. Only four new cases are
reported in individuals whose work brings them into contact with large numbers of people, suggesting that
restrictions on gatherings may be having some effect.
• 67 of 77 provinces have reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19.
UPDATE ON NATIONAL SECURITY MEASURES FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF THAILAND:
• The Government has approved more than 4 Billion Baht for the National Health Security Office to support
the costs of prevention, treatment and compensation for COVID-19 patients. These funds will help provide
support for free laboratory screening tests for all Thai people who meet the surveillance criteria.
The funds will also be used to purchase protective equipment for ambulance services and healthcare
workers.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,369 confirmed (111 new)
30 deaths (3 new)
1,451 people hospitalized
55 healthcare staff infected (2 new)
61 severe cases
888 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 8 April 2020
KEY MESSAGES FROM THE NEW WHO GUIDANCE ON FACE MASKS IN THE COMMUNITY:
• It is critical that medical masks and respirators be prioritized for health care workers.
• The use of nonmedical masks made of other materials (e.g., cotton fabric) in the community setting
has not been well evaluated. There is no current evidence to make a recommendation for or against
their use in this setting.
• WHO is collaborating with research and development partners to better understand the effectiveness
of nonmedical masks. WHO strongly encourages countries that issue recommendations for the use of
masks for healthy people in the community to conduct research on this critical topic. WHO will update
its guidance when new evidence becomes available.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
o Masks are not a substitute for proper handwashing with soap and water
or with alcohol rub.
o Please do not wear N95 respirators as supplies are currently low and
these are specialised masks that are needed for healthcare workers.
o In this video Dr Daniel Kertesz of WHO Thailand explains how to wear a
face mask safely, and how to dispose of it properly.
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for essential activities (e.g. medical care, purchase food).
• Always try to maintain a distance of at least 1 metre from all other persons
• Do not use N95 masks- they are needed for healthcare workers.
• Wash your hands frequently with soap and water. An alcohol-based hand rub is also effective
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides information / advice to staff of the UN system in Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
