Coronavirus: action plan
A guide to what you can expect across the UK
Published 3 March 2020
2
3
Contents
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................4
2. What we know about the virus and the diseases it causes ...........................................5
3. How the UK prepares for infectious disease outbreaks.................................................7
Planning Principles...........................................................................................................9
4. Our response to the current coronavirus outbreak ......................................................11
Current planning.............................................................................................................11
The phased response - what we have done so far.........................................................11
The role the public can play in supporting this response................................................16
The phased response - what we will do next..................................................................17
Annex A - responsibilities for pandemic preparedness and response ...............................22
National responsibilities..................................................................................................22
Local/Regional responsibilities .......................................................................................22
Multi-agency working......................................................................................................23
Other key public services ...............................................................................................23
Annex B - expert advice and guidance ..............................................................................24
References ........................................................................................................................25
4
1. Introduction
1.1 The current novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak, which began in December
2019, presents a significant challenge for the entire world. The UK Government
and the Devolved Administrations, including the health and social care systems,
have planned extensively over the years for an event like this, and the UK is
therefore well prepared to respond in a way that offers substantial protection to the
public.
1.2 Of course, this is a new virus, and new technology and the increasing connectivity
of our world mean that our plans need to be kept up to date, to reflect that
illnesses – and news and information about them – travel much more quickly today
than even ten years ago.
1.3 Recognising the respective roles and responsibilities of the UK Government and
Devolved Administrations, this document sets out what the UK as a whole has
already done - and plans to do further - to tackle the current coronavirus outbreak,
based on our wealth of experience dealing with other infectious diseases and our
influenza pandemic preparedness work. The exact response to COVID-19 will be
tailored to the nature, scale and location of the threat in the UK, as our
understanding of this develops.
1.4 This document sets out:
• what we know about the virus and the disease it causes
• how we have planned for an infectious disease outbreak, such as the current
coronavirus outbreak
• the actions we have taken so far in response to the current coronavirus
outbreak
• what we are planning to do next, depending upon the course the current
coronavirus outbreak takes.
• the role the public can play in supporting this response, now and in the future.
5
2. What we know about the virus and the
diseases it causes
2.1 Coronaviruses are a family of viruses common across the world in animals and
humans; certain types cause illnesses in people. For example, some
coronaviruses cause the common cold; others cause diseases which are much
more severe such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) and Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), both of which often lead to pneumonia.
2.2 COVID-19 is the illness seen in people infected with a new strain of coronavirus
not previously seen in humans. On 31st December 2019, Chinese authorities
notified the World Health Organisation (WHO) of an outbreak of pneumonia in
Wuhan City, which was later classified as a new disease: COVID-19.
2.3 On 30th January 2020, WHO declared the outbreak of COVID-19 a “Public Health
Emergency of International Concern” (PHEIC).
2.4 Based on current evidence, the main symptoms of COVID-19 are a cough, a high
temperature and, in severe cases, shortness of breath.
2.5 As it is a new virus, the lack of immunity in the population (and the absence as yet
of an effective vaccine) means that COVID-19 has the potential to spread
extensively. The current data seem to show that we are all susceptible to catching
this disease, and thus it also more likely than not that the UK will be significantly
affected. Among those who become infected, some will exhibit no symptoms1.
Early data suggest that of those who develop an illness, the great majority2 will
have a mild-to-moderate, but self-limiting illness – similar to seasonal flu3.
2.6 It is, however, also clear that a minority of people who get COVID-19 will develop
complications severe enough to require hospital care4, most often pneumonia. In
a small proportion of these, the illness may be severe enough to lead to death5.
So far the data we have suggest that the risk of severe disease and death
increases amongst elderly people and in people with underlying health risk
conditions (in the same way as for seasonal flu)6 7. Illness is less common and
usually less severe in younger adults8. Children can be infected9 and can have a
severe illness10, but based on current data overall illness seems rarer in people
under 20 years of age. So far, there has been no obvious sign that pregnant
women are more likely to be seriously affected11 12.
2.7 Given that the data are still emerging, we are uncertain of the impact of an
outbreak on business. In a stretching scenario, it is possible that up to one fifth of
6
employees may be absent from work during peak weeks. This may vary for
individual businesses.
2.8 We do not yet have entirely complete data on this disease. But as we learn more
about the virus, its effects and its behaviour (for example, the timing and extent of
the peak of an outbreak, its precise impact on individuals), we will be able to revise
estimates of its potential spread, severity and impact13. We will then review, and
(where necessary) adapt this plan accordingly.
2.9 Work is in hand to contain the spread of the virus. This includes extensive
guidance provided to individuals returning from areas where there are cases being
reported, and encouraging self-isolation as the primary means to contain the
spread of the disease. Given that there is currently neither a vaccine against
COVID-19 nor any specific, proven, antiviral medication14 15, most treatment will
therefore be towards managing symptoms and providing support to patients with
complications. The majority of people with COVID-19 have recovered without the
need for any specific treatment, as is the case for the common cold or seasonal flu
- and we expect that the vast majority of cases will best be managed at home,
again as with seasonal colds and flu.
7
3. How the UK prepares for infectious
disease outbreaks
3.1 The table below shows the impact of some of the major respiratory virus
pandemics and epidemics in the last 100 years.
Major respiratory virus outbreaks
Area of
emergence
Estimated
case fatality
ratio*
Estimated
attributable
excess
mortality
worldwide
Estimated
attributable
excess
mortality in
the UK
Age groups
most
affected
Spanish Flu 1918 – 1919 Severe influenza pandemic
Unclear ≥ 2% 20 – 50
million
200,000 Young adults,
elderly and
young
children
Asian Flu 1957 – 1958 Moderate influenza pandemic
Southern
China
0.1 – 0.2% 1 – 4 million 33,000 Children
Hong Kong Flu 1968 – 1969 Moderate influenza pandemic
Southern
China
0.2 – 0.4% 1 – 4 million 80,000 All age
groups
Swine Flu 2009 – 2010 Very mild influenza pandemic
8
Area of
emergence
Estimated
case fatality
ratio*
Estimated
attributable
excess
mortality
worldwide
Estimated
attributable
excess
mortality in
the UK
Age groups
most
affected
Mexico <0.025% 18,000 457 Children,
young adults
and pregnant
women
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome 2012 Continuing coronavirus pandemic
threat
Middle East >30% 861 0 Elderly (60+)
Serious Acute Respiratory Syndrome 2002 - 2003 Severe coronavirus
pandemic ‘near-miss’
China <10% 774 0 Middle aged
adults (45 -
65)
Seasonal flu epidemic 1989 - 1990 Severe influenza seasonal epidemic
UK Data not
available
Not
applicable
26,000
excess
deaths in
England &
Wales
Elderly 75+
* the proportion of people who became ill with symptoms and subsequently died
3.2 The UK is well prepared for disease outbreaks, having responded to a wide range
of infectious disease outbreaks in the recent past, and having undertaken
significant preparedness work for an influenza pandemic for well over one decade
(eg. our existing plan ‘flu plans16). Our plans have been regularly tested and
updated locally and nationally to ensure they are fit for purpose. This experience
9
provides the basis for an effective response to COVID-19, which can be tailored as
more specific information emerges about the virus.
3.3 These plans ensure the UK is equipped to deliver a coordinated multi agency
response to minimise wider societal impact that could arise from a significant
outbreak. An effective response also requires the active participation of a well-
informed public and all service providers.
3.4 Planning draws on the idea of a “reasonable worst case (RWC)” scenario. This is
not a forecast of what is most likely to happen, but will ensure we are ready to
respond to a range of scenarios.
Planning Principles
3.5 In preparing for, and responding to, a serious disease outbreak, the UK and the
Devolved Administrations aim to:
• undertake dynamic risk assessments of potential health and other impacts,
using the best available scientific advice and evidence to inform decision
making
• minimise the potential health impact by slowing spread in the UK and
overseas, and reducing infection, illness and death
• minimise the potential impact on society and the UK and global economy,
including key public services
• maintain trust and confidence amongst the organisations and people who
provide key public services, and those who use them
• ensure dignified treatment of all affected, including those who die
• be active global players - working with the World Health Organization (WHO),
the Global Health Security Initiative (GHSI), the European Centre for Disease
Prevention and Control (ECDC), and neighbouring countries, in supporting
international efforts to detect the emergence of a pandemic and early
assessment of the virus by sharing scientific information
• ensure that the agencies responsible for tackling the outbreak are properly
resourced to do so, that they have the people, equipment and medicines they
need, and that any necessary changes to legislation are taken forward as
quickly as possible
10
• be guided by the evidence, and regularly review research and development
needs, in collaboration with research partners, to enhance our pandemic
preparedness and response.
3.6 The UK Government and the Devolved Administrations have been planning an
initial response based on information available at the time, in a context of
uncertainty, that can be scaled up and down in response to new information to
ensure a flexible and proportionate response.
3.7 The fundamental objectives are to deploy phased actions to Contain, Delay, and
Mitigate any outbreak, using Research to inform policy development.
3.8 The different phases, types and scale of actions depends upon how the course of
the outbreak unfolds over time. We monitor local, national and international data
continuously to model what might happen next, over the immediate and longer
terms.
3.9 The overall phases of our plan to respond to COVID-19 are:
• Contain: detect early cases, follow up close contacts, and prevent the disease
taking hold in this country for as long as is reasonably possible
• Delay: slow the spread in this country, if it does take hold, lowering the peak
impact and pushing it away from the winter season
• Research: better understand the virus and the actions that will lessen its effect
on the UK population; innovate responses including diagnostics, drugs and
vaccines; use the evidence to inform the development of the most effective
models of care
• Mitigate: provide the best care possible for people who become ill, support
hospitals to maintain essential services and ensure ongoing support for people
ill in the community to minimise the overall impact of the disease on society,
public services and on the economy.
11
4. Our response to the current
coronavirus outbreak
Current planning
4.1 There is similarity between COVID-19 and influenza (both are respiratory
infections), but also some important differences. Consequently, contingency plans
developed for pandemic influenza17, and lessons learned from previous outbreaks,
provide a useful starting point for the development of an effective response plan to
COVID-19. That plan has been adapted, however, to take account of differences
between the two diseases. Annex A sets out the structure for the UK’s response to
a disease outbreak.
4.2 Our response to COVID-19 is guided by the international situation, the advice of
organisations such as the WHO, surveillance, data modelling based on the best
available evidence and the recommendations of our expert bodies (Annex B). The
Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) provides expert medical
scientific advice. The four UK governments’ Chief Medical Officers (CMOs)
continue to advise the health and social care systems across the UK, and
government agencies in all parts of the UK involved in responding to this outbreak.
4.3 System wide response plans for pandemic influenza, focused on the continuity of
public and critical services and the stability of the economy, have been adapted for
COVID-19, based on the best available scientific evidence and advice. For the
latest information on the current situation please refer to:
www.gov.uk/guidance/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-information-for-the-public.
4.4 The nature and scale of the response depends on the course of the disease,
which cannot be predicted accurately at this point. As our understanding of the
disease increases and its impact becomes clearer, we will issue further detailed
advice about what to expect if/when further measures become necessary.
The phased response - what we have done so far
4.5 As there are already cases in the UK, the current emphasis is on the Contain and
Research phases, but planning for Delay and Mitigation is already in train.
12
The Contain phase - actions to date
4.6 Across the whole of the UK, public health agencies and authorities, the NHS, and
Health and Social Care NI (HSCNI) have established plans and procedures to
detect and isolate the first cases of COVID-19 as they emerge in the UK. Each
nation's public health agencies have worked with Border Force, port operators and
carriers to enhance port health measures. PHE teams are on site at appropriate
international ports, and health advice and information has been widely cascaded,
as part of our public communications plan, with appropriate arrangements also put
in place in the Devolved Administrations (given that some aspects relating to the
arrival of aircraft and shipping are devolved).
4.7 Border Force and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) have assisted the
repatriation of British nationals and their dependents from affected areas
overseas. Where foreign nationals in the UK have been unable to return to
affected areas, the Home Office have provided support enabling them to remain in
the UK.
4.8 New regulations introduced in England under public health legislation provide new
powers for medical professionals, public health professionals and the police to
allow them to detain and direct individuals in quarantined areas at risk or
suspected of having the virus. In Scotland Health Boards have powers to place
restrictions on the activities of individuals who are known to have the disease, or
have been exposed to the disease, and to prohibit them from entering or
remaining in any place. Boards may also apply for court orders for quarantine and
medical examination. In Wales, local authorities have powers to apply for an order
to be made by the Justice of the Peace to isolate, detain or require individuals to
undergo medical examination. Similar powers are available to the Public Health
Agency in Northern Ireland. Welsh Ministers also have powers to make regulations
equivalent to those now in place in England if the level of risk increases.
4.9 As part of the port health measures, direct flights arriving into the UK from
countries within the UK's CMOs' case definition are required to provide a
declaration (General Aircraft Declaration) to airport authorities stating that all their
passengers are well, 60 minutes prior to landing. Similarly, The Maritime Health
Declaration Form is required for all vessels arriving from any foreign port. For
Scotland parallel measures are in place.
4.10 The health and social care systems and public health authorities in all parts of the
UK have cascaded information widely to all health professionals on steps to take if
they identify patients who may have COVID-19.
4.11 The NHS/HSCNI have well rehearsed plans that have enabled the provision of
excellent care for all patients affected by this disease. The initial confirmed
13
patients are being cared for by specialist units with expertise in handling such
cases, using tried and tested infection control procedures to prevent further spread
of the virus. When necessary, the provision of care may move from specialist units
into general facilities in hospitals
4.12 The NHS/HSCNI have expert teams in every ambulance service and a number of
specialist hospital units with highly trained staff and equipment ready to receive
and care for patients – these provide coverage across the whole of the UK. If the
current outbreak takes a greater hold, we will use those lessons about effective
treatment methods and apply them throughout our health services, across all
hospital sites and into community settings.
4.13 Once a case has been detected, our public health agencies use tried and tested
procedures for rapid tracing, monitoring and isolation of close contacts, with the
aim of preventing further spread.
4.14 The UK maintains strategic stockpiles of the most important medicines and
protective equipment for healthcare staff who may come into contact with patients
with the virus. These stocks are being monitored daily, with additional stock being
ordered where necessary.
4.15 We have provided UK residents and travellers with the latest information to make
sure they know what to do if they experience symptoms and worked with NHS
111, NHS Direct Wales and NHS 24 in Scotland, to ensure people with symptoms
are given appropriate advice. Public health advice has been widely publicised and
is regularly updated at www.gov.uk/guidance/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-
information-for-the-public
4.16 FCO Travel Advice gives British nationals advice on what they need to know
before deciding whether to travel and what to do if they are affected by an
outbreak of COVID-19 while travelling. Our Travel Advice and consular assistance
also help to contain the spread of COVID-19 to the UK.
4.17 Advice has been provided to first responders, employers, the justice system
(including prison and probation services), educational settings, and the adult social
care sector. The Department for Education provides advice about educational
settings in England, which can be found on PHE’s website. A DfE helpline is
being set up to manage the flow of increasing queries, from providers and from
parents of pupils.
4.18 Equivalent guidance for educational settings in Scotland can be found on the
Health Protection Scotland website. This guidance provides links to further advice
via NHS Inform and contact details for local Health Protection Teams. Scottish
local authorities can also provide advice and support to education settings in their
14
areas, working closely with local Health Protection Teams and local and regional
resilience partnerships.
4.19 In Wales, guidance for educational settings is provided on the Welsh Government
website which also provides links to further public health advice -
https://gov.wales/guidance-educational-settings-about-covid-19.
4.20 Department for International Trade teams around the globe continue to support
British companies facing disruption due to the Coronavirus. The Department’s
officials across the globe are already working with UK businesses on the ground to
relay public health advice and FCO travel advice, and provide practical and
concrete support to firms, including engaging with local government and suppliers,
and working with business associations to disseminate latest information on UK
consular and visa services, and accessing existing UK Export Finance facilities.
4.21 All NHS and HSCNI emergency and urgent care facilities are working to establish
coronavirus assessment services to lessen impacts on Emergency Departments
and other clinical settings. This enables them to identify, isolate and contain cases,
separate from other patients and the public, and in a way scalable to cope with
expanding need. Specifically tailored and effective services responding to this
outbreak have protected GPs, ambulance and hospital services for other patients.
4.22 The safety and security of British Nationals overseas will always be our top
priority. Our initial focus has been helping those Britons who have found
themselves at the greatest risk of exposure to the virus. Our crisis response team
in the FCO has been working around the clock with our Embassies throughout the
world to provide them with the care they need and reduce the risk of importation of
Coronavirus into the UK. This includes the use of quarantine and self-isolation
measures for those returning from at risk areas.
The Delay phase - actions to date
4.23 Many of the actions involved in the Contain phase also act to help Delay the onset
of an epidemic if it becomes inevitable. These include case finding and isolation of
early cases.
4.24 Many of the actions that people can take themselves - especially washing hands
more; and the catch it, bin it, kill it strategy for those with coughs and sneezes -
also help in delaying the peak of the infection.
4.25 Our experts are considering what other actions will be most effective in slowing the
spread of the virus in the UK, as more information about it emerges. Some of
these will have social costs where the benefit of doing them to Delay the peak will
15
need to be considered against the social impact. The best possible scientific
advice and other experts will inform any decision on what will be most effective.
4.26 Delaying the spread of the disease requires all of us to follow the advice set out
below. The benefits of doing so are that if the peak of the outbreak can be delayed
until the warmer months, we can reduce significantly the risk of overlapping with
seasonal flu and other challenges (societal or medical) that the colder months
bring. The Delay phase also buys time for the testing of drugs and initial
development of vaccines and/or improved therapies or tests to help reduce the
impact of the disease. There is therefore a strong dependency between the
different elements of our approach.
The Research phase - actions to date
4.27 The UK Government is liaising with the National Institute for Health Research
(NIHR), UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) including the Medical Research
Council (MRC) and other funders such as the Wellcome Trust to support and co-
ordinate research during the COVID-19 outbreak.
4.28 Our Public Health Agencies are supporting the rapid development of specific tests
for this coronavirus, in partnership with WHO and a global network of laboratories.
This has been rolled out to NHS/HSCNI laboratories across the UK to enable
faster confirmation of positive diagnoses.
4.29 The UK Government has already pledged £20 million to the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) to develop new vaccines to combat the world’s
deadliest diseases, including vaccines for COVID-19, as quickly as possible, and
is actively considering further investment.
4.30 The UK Government has also additionally announced £20 million for COVID-19
research via a joint rapid research call between UKRI and, through DHSC, the
National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). This asks for proposals for projects
to develop vaccines, therapeutics, and diagnostics; or to address the
epidemiology, spread or underpinning knowledge of COVID-19.
4.31 Our health and social care departments across the UK are seeking to build on the
relationships they have with institutions involved in Health Protection Research. A
number of these are involved in research in relation to the COVID-19 epidemic.
4.32 This includes one on Emergency Preparedness and Response led by King’s
College London. It brings together experts on how to conduct important research
that includes research on how to respond to infectious disease outbreaks such as
COVID-19.
16
4.33 The UK is a world leader in the field of outbreak modelling and data analytics. The
NIHR HPRU in Modelling Methodology led by Imperial College London has
developed novel analytical and computational tools which exploit novel data
streams on infectious diseases such as COVID-19. This group and other leading
academic groups have developed tools to prepare for infectious disease
outbreaks, which include real time infectious disease models, allowing policy
decisions to be made using the best possible data and are actively modelling
questions of relevance to dealing with the COVID–19 outbreak.
The role the public can play in supporting this response
4.34 Everyone can help support the UK’s response by:
• following public health authorities’ advice, for example on hand washing
• reducing the impact and spread of misinformation by relying on information
from trusted sources, such as that on www.nhs.uk/, www.nhsinform.scot,
www.publichealth.hscni.net, https://gov.wales/coronavirus-covid-19 and
www.gov.uk/
• checking and following the latest FCO travel advice when travelling and
planning to travel
• ensuring you and your family’s vaccinations are up to date as this will help
reduce the pressure on the NHS/HSCNI through reducing vaccine-preventable
diseases
• checking on elderly or vulnerable family, friends and neighbours
• using NHS 111 (or NHS 24 in Scotland or NHS Direct Wales) (including
online, where possible), pharmacies and GPs responsibly, and go to the
hospital only when you really need to. This is further explained on the NHS
website - www.nhs.uk/using-the-nhs/nhs-services/urgent-and-emergency-
care/when-to-go-to-ae/ and http://www.choosewellwales.org.uk/home
• being understanding of the pressures the health and social care systems may
be under, and receptive to changes that may be needed to the provision of
care to you and your family.
• accepting that the advice for managing COVID-19 for most people will be self-
isolation at home and simple over the counter medicines
• checking for new advice as the situation changes.
17
The phased response - what we will do next
4.35 In the event of the outbreak worsening, or a severe prolonged pandemic, the
response will escalate, and the focus will move from Contain to Delay, through to
Mitigate. During this phase the pressures on services and wider society may start
to become significant and clearly noticeable.
4.36 The decision to step up the response from Contain to Delay and then Mitigate will
be taken on advice from the UK's Chief Medical Officers, taking in to account the
degree of sustained transmission and evident failure of measures in other
countries to reduce spread.
4.37 To ensure that the health and social care system is prepared to respond to all
eventualities, at all phases of a potential future pandemic, the NHS/HSCNI and
local authorities have plans in place to ensure people receive the essential care
and support services they need - and sometimes this might mean that other
services are reduced temporarily. Plans are flexible to respond to different types of
pandemics - ranging from a mild pandemic with a low impact on services (for
example the 2009 H1N1 pandemic), through to a severe prolonged pandemic as
experienced in 1918 ("Spanish Flu").
4.38 Similarly, potential pandemics are one of a wide range of risks that the owners and
operators of our most essential services and systems plan for. The UK
Government and Devolved Administrations are currently working with our critical
national infrastructure partners to ensure that these plans are appropriate for
COVID-19, and that we minimise any impacts that could disrupt the daily services
on which the UK depends.
4.39 The Ministry of Defence has put in place plans to ensure the delivery of its key
operations in the UK and overseas. There are also well practised arrangements for
Defence to provide support to Civil Authorities if requested.
4.40 The UK Government will also step up the central co-ordination of its overall
response using its proven crisis management mechanisms: COBR would meet as
often as needed, bringing in system leaders to co-ordinate vital public services;
and there will be more communication with Parliament, the media and the public.
Ministers from across government will be designated to lead for their department
on handling the outbreak; with senior officials and system leaders working
intensively alongside them. The respective crisis management mechanisms
across the Devolved Administrations have also been stood up and will operate in
very similar terms to that of COBR within their own nations, and all four co-
ordination centres are linked up on UK-wide planning and delivery of the response
to Covid-19.
18
4.41 There will be regular meetings between the UK Government, and NHS/HSCNI and
public health leaders, chaired alternately by the Secretary of State for Health and
Social Care and his Permanent Secretary, to discuss the most recent advice from
scientific experts and those delivering key services, and to decide next steps.
The Delay phase - next steps
4.42 If the disease becomes established in the UK, we will need to consider further
measures to reduce the rate and extent of its spread. Based on experience with
previous outbreaks, it may be that widespread exposure in the UK is inevitable;
but slowing it down would still nonetheless be beneficial. For example, health
services are less busy in the summer months when flu and other winter bugs are
not driving GP consultations and hospital admissions. In the 2009 ‘swine flu’
pandemic school holidays significantly slowed transmission of the virus.
4.43 We will increase publicity about the need for good hygiene measures (hand
washing, and catch it, bin it, kill it) and further promote the need for people with
symptoms to stay at home for the full duration of their illness.
4.44 Other action will be considered to help achieve a Delay in the spread of the
disease. We will aim to minimise the social and economic impact, subject to
keeping people safe. Such judgements will be informed based on the best
available and most up to date scientific evidence, and take into account the trade-
offs involved.
4.45 Action that would be considered could include population distancing strategies
(such as school closures, encouraging greater home working, reducing the
number of large scale gatherings) to slow the spread of the disease throughout the
population, whilst ensuring the country’s ability to continue to run as normally as
possible. The UK governments' education departments' planning assumptions
include the possibility of having to close educational settings in order to reduce the
spread of infection.
4.46 We would consider such measures in order to protect vulnerable individuals with
underlying illnesses and thus at greater more at risk of becoming seriously
affected by the disease. The effectiveness of these actions will need to be
balanced against their impact on society.
The Research phase - next steps
4.47 It is possible that an outbreak or pandemic of COVID-19 could occur in multiple
waves (it is not known yet if the disease will have a seasonal pattern, like flu) and
therefore, depending upon what the emerging evidence starts to tell us, it may be
19
necessary to ensure readiness for a future wave of activity. The intention is to
gather evidence about effective interventions in order to inform decision-making
going forward. The UK Government will keep emerging research needs under
close review and progress research activities set out above.
The Mitigate phase - next steps
4.48 As and when the disease moves into different phases, for example if transmission
of the virus becomes established in the UK population, the nature and scale of the
response will change. The chief focus will be to provide essential services, helping
those most at risk to access the right treatment. This means that:
• there will be further publicity of advice to individuals about protecting
themselves and others
• treatment and the requirement for medicines and other clinical
countermeasures might start to increase, with the need to draw down on
existing stockpiles of the most important medicines, medical devices and
clinical consumables
• health and social care services will work together to support early discharge
from hospital, and to look after people in their own homes
• emergency services, including the police and fire and rescue services will
enact business continuity plans to ensure they are able to maintain a level of
service that fulfils their critical functions. For example, with a significant loss of
officers and staff, the police would concentrate on responding to serious
crimes and maintaining public order
• for businesses facing short term cash flow issues (for example, as the result of
subdued demand), an effective mitigation already exists in HMRC’s Time To
Pay system. This is offered on a case by case basis if a firm or individual
contacts HMRC about falling behind on their tax
• as NHS/HSCNI staff also start to become affected, and more seriously ill
patients require admission, clinicians may recommend a significantly different
approach to admissions. Some non-urgent care may be delayed to prioritise
and triage service delivery. Staff rostering changes may be necessary,
including calling leavers and retirees back to duty
• there could well be an increase in deaths arising from the outbreak,
particularly amongst vulnerable and elderly groups. The UK Government and
Devolved Administrations will provide advice for local authorities on dealing
with this challenge
20
• there will be less emphasis on large scale preventative measures such as
intensive contact tracing. As the disease becomes established, these
measures may lose their effectiveness and resources would be more
effectively used elsewhere.
4.49 Everyone will face increased pressures at work, as well as potentially their own
personal illness or caring responsibilities. Supporting staff welfare will be critical to
supporting an extended response.
4.50 We will implement a distribution strategy for the UK’s stockpiles of key medicines
and equipment (e.g. protective clothing). This will cover the NHS/HSCNI, and
extend to social care and other sectors as appropriate.
4.51 We will consider legislative options, if necessary, to help systems and services
work more effectively in tackling the outbreak.
4.52 The UK’s health and social care systems will start to implement their business
continuity plans, which cover:
• continuing to minimise the risk of infection to patients and those receiving care
• further identification of vulnerable persons to be supported
• arrangements for the continuation of essential services, to maintain normal
business for as many people as possible for as long as possible
• plans to reduce the impact of absentees during the pandemic
• systems to lessen the impact of disruption to society and the supply chain.
4.53 The UK remains in a high state of readiness to respond robustly to any disease
outbreak, and our track record of success means that we can offer a high degree
of assurance that we will be able to maximise the effectiveness of our health and
care systems, and in doing so also respond effectively to the outbreak.
4.54 As and when we discover more about the disease and what, if any, impact its
course has on the UK, we will provide further updates on how our plans are being
adapted to respond to specific, changing circumstances.
4.55 The UK Government is advising businesses to build their own resilience by
reviewing their business continuity plans and following the advice for employers
available on GOV.UK - www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidance-to-
employers-and-businesses-about-covid-19
21
4.56 Businesses should also ensure that they keep up to date with the situation as it
changes, at: www.gov.uk/coronavirus.
22
Annex A - responsibilities for pandemic
preparedness and response
National responsibilities
The Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) is the lead UK Government
Department with responsibility for responding to the risk posed by a future pandemic.
The four UK CMOs provide public health advice to the whole system and government
throughout the UK. The Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) is responsible
for ensuring that a single source of coordinated scientific advice is provided to decision
makers in COBR.
The NHS works in partnership with Local Resilience Forums on pandemic preparedness
and response delivery in healthcare systems in England and Wales. Public Health England
provides specialist technical expertise to support both planning and delivery arrangements
in England, working closely with public health agencies in Wales, Scotland and Northern
Ireland. These organisations have developed plans for coordinating the response at a
national level and supporting local responders through their regional structures. The tri-
partite partnership of DHSC, PHE and NHS England provides strategic oversight and
direction for the health and adult social care response to an influenza pandemic, with
Department for Education (DfE) leading on the children's social care response. In
Devolved Administrations, there are similar arrangements for multi-agency working with
strategic oversight provided by the appropriate departments. These arrangements are
supported by national co-ordination structures.
PHE and their equivalent in the Devolved Administrations lead the provision of expert
advice on health protection issues and actively contributes to the planning and delivery of
a multi-agency response. PHE provides health protection services, expertise and advice,
delivering specialist public health services to UK national and local government (in
England), the NHS/HSCNI and the public, working in partnership to protect the public
against infectious diseases. There are comparable public health expert advisory support
arrangements in each of the other three UK countries.
Local/Regional responsibilities
In England and Wales, local organisations (working jointly through the Local Resilience
Forums and Local Health Resilience Partnerships in England, and NHS emergency
planning structures in Wales) have the primary responsibility for planning for and
responding to any major emergency, including a pandemic. Similar arrangements exist in
23
Scotland working through Regional Resilience and Local Resilience Partnerships. In
Northern Ireland, Emergency Preparedness Groups coordinate emergency planning at the
local level.
Multi-agency working
Multi-agency working at both a national and local level ensures joint planning between all
organisations. A coordinated approach to ensure best use of resources to achieve the best
outcome for the local area.
NHS England and NHS Improvement and partners have published a series of quick guides
to assist multi-agency working and support local health and care systems manage
increasing demand on their services. The series of guides can be found at
www.nhs.uk/quickguides. Integration Authorities in Scotland have access to a range of
government advice on priorities for multi-agency working, which supports existing local
plans to optimise care pathways.
Social care is provided by a diverse range of local authority, private and third sector
bodies. It is important that the role of social care provision in all sectors is central to
contingency planning. Social care providers should remain in contact with local
commissioners and resilience partners, review their business continuity plans and continue
to practice proper infection control and good respiratory hygiene practice.
Other key public services
The Ministry of Justice’s HM Courts & Tribunal Service have well established plans to
deliver key services to protect the public and maintain confidence in the justice system.
Similar plans are in place in the Devolved Administrations.
24
Annex B - expert advice and guidance
The UK Government and the Devolved Administrations have ensured that all of our
actions are based on the best possible evidence, and are guided by the four UK CMOs.
The UK health departments preparations and response are developed with expert advice,
ensuring that staff, patients and the wider public can be confident that our plans are
developed and implemented using the best available evidence. These groups include:
• the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) – Chaired by the Government
Chief Scientific Adviser and co-chaired by the CMO for England - provides scientific
and technical advice to support government decision makers during emergencies,
ensuring that timely and coordinated scientific advice is made available to decision
makers to support UK cross-government decisions in the UK Cabinet Office Briefing
Room
• the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (NERVTAG) is an
expert committee of DHSC and advises the CMOs and, through the CMOs, ministers,
DHSC and other Government departments, and the Devolved Administrations. It
provides scientific risk assessment and mitigation advice on the threat posed by new
and emerging respiratory virus threats and on options for their management
• the Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens (ACDP) - provides independent
scientific advice to the Health and Safety Executive, to Ministers in DHSC and DEFRA,
and to their counterparts in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland on all aspects of
hazards and risks to workers and others from exposure to pathogens
• the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling (SPI-M) - gives expert advice to
the Department of Health and Social Care and wider UK government and the
Devolved Administrations on scientific matters relating to the UK’s response to an
influenza pandemic (or other emerging human infectious disease threats). The advice
is based on infectious disease modelling and epidemiology
• the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) advises UK health
departments on immunisation
• FCO Travel Advice is informed by PHE and DHSC advice and gives British nationals
advice on what they need to know before deciding whether to travel and what to do if
they are affected by an outbreak of COVID-19 while travelling.
The actions we are taking to tackle the COVID-19 outbreak are being informed by the
advice of these committees.
25
References
1 Chan JF-W, Yuan S, Kok K-H, et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the
2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family
cluster. Lancet 2020; 395: 514–23
2 The Epidemioloigcal Characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 Novel COVID-19 – China
2020 (China CDC Weekly Vol 2 No. x)
https://github.com/cmrivers/ncov/blob/master/COVID-19.pdf
3 Xu XW, Wu XX, Jiang XG, Xu KJ, Ying LJ, Ma CL, et al. Clinical findings in a group of
patients infected with the 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS-Cov-2) outside of Wuhan, China:
retrospective case series. BMJ. 2020 Feb 19;368
4 Sun K, Chen J, Viboud C. Early epidemiological analysis of the coronavirus disease 2019
outbreak based on crowdsourced data: a population-level observational study. Lancet
Digital Health 2020; published online Feb 20. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-
7500(20)30026-1
5 Liu Y, Yang Y, Zhang C, Huang F, Wang F, Yuan J, et al. Clinical and biochemical
indexes from 2019-nCoV infected patients linked to viral loads and lung injury. Science
China Life Sciences. 2020 Feb 9:1-1
6 Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, Qu J, Gong F, Han Y, et al. Epidemiological and clinical
characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a
descriptive study. The Lancet. 2020 Jan 30
7 Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, Zhang L, Fan G, Xu J, Gu X, Cheng Z.
Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The
Lancet. 2020 Jan 24
8 Li J, Li S, Cai Y, Liu Q, Li X, Zeng Z, Chu Y, Zhu F, Zeng F. Epidemiological and Clinical
Characteristics of 17 Hospitalized Patients with 2019 Novel Coronavirus Infections Outside
Wuhan, China. medRxiv. 2020 Jan 1
9 Li, Q., et al Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus-
Infected Pneumonia. NEJM. 2020 Jan 29 DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2001316
10 Wang X, Yuan J, Zheng Y, Chen J, Bao Y, Wang Y, et al. Clinical and Epidemiological
Characteristics of 34 Children With 2019 Novel Coronavirus Infection in Shenzhen.
Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2020; 58(0): E008-E008
11 Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, Luo F, Yu X, Zhang W, Li J, Zhao D, Xu D, Gong Q, Liao J.
Clinical characteristics and intrauterine vertical transmission potential of COVID-19
infection in nine pregnant women: a retrospective review of medical records. The Lancet.
2020 Feb 12
26
12 Qiao J. What are the risks of COVID-19 infection in pregnant women?. The Lancet.
2020 Feb 12
13 Famulare, M. 2019-nCoV: preliminary estimates of the confirmed-case-fatality-ratio and
infection-fatality-ratio, and initial pandemic risk assessment. Institute for Disease Modelling
Feb 19 2020 https://institutefordiseasemodeling.github.io/nCoV-
public/analyses/first_adjusted_mortality_estimates_and_risk_assessment/2019-nCoV-
preliminary_age_and_time_adjusted_mortality_rates_and_pandemic_risk_assessment.ht
ml
14 World Health Organization [Internet]. R&D Blueprint: Coronavirus disease (COVID-
2019) R&D; accessed 23rd February 2020. Available from:
https://www.who.int/blueprint/priority-diseases/key-action/novel-coronavirus/en/
15 Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations [Internet]. CEPI launches new call for
proposals to develop vaccines against novel coronavirus, 2019-nCoV; accessed 23rd
February 2020. Available from: https://cepi.net/news_cepi/cepi-launches-new-call-for-
proposals-to-develop-vaccines-against-novel-coronavirus-2019-ncov/
16 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/Responding-to-a-uk-flu-pandemic
17 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/Responding-to-a-uk-flu-pandemic
27
© Crown copyright 2020
Emergency and Health Protection Directorate
www.gov.uk/dhsc
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
