HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 4th of April 2020, 89 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,067.
• Of the newly reported cases, 21 cases were identified in people
entering or returning to Thailand, highlighting the need for strict
compliance with quarantine requirements. The Thai Government
has announced that between now and 15 April, Thailand will take
steps to reduce the number of people entering the country.
• A total of 33 of the new cases are close contacts of previously
confirmed cases, highlighting the need for strict adherence with
social distancing in all settings. Cases are also still being reported in individuals whose work brings them
into contact with large numbers of people, suggesting that further social distancing restrictions may be
required.
• 64 of 77 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19. Approximately half of the
cases to date have occurred in Bangkok and half have been detected in other provinces.
• 35 healthcare workers have been infected to date. To protect our healthcare workers and health system, it
is essential that all of us remain inside our homes as much as possible, maintain a distance of at least 1.5
meters from other persons, wash our hands frequently and comply with the Thai government request for all
persons to wear cloth face masks when in public spaces.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 4 April 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
total and new cases reported
in the last 24 hours
2,067 confirmed (89 new)
20 deaths (1 new)
1,435 people hospitalized
35 healthcare staff infected (3 new)
23 severe cases
612 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 4 April 2020
UPDATES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN THAILAND
• On April 3rd
the Civil Aviation Authority of Thailand announced a regulation prohibiting all commercial
flights from entering Thailand until April 6th
. All returnees will be held in quarantine at a government
approved hotel for 14 days.
• The government has announced a nationwide curfew beginning April 3rd
. All residents are instructed to
remain inside their homes between the hours of 10pm and 4am. Police have set up checkpoints across
the country to closely monitor.
• The government requests that everyone wear a cloth face mask when outside their home.
• The government is preparing to use certain hotels as field hospitals. A total of 16,000 rooms from
contracted hotels will be used for the isolation and care of mildly ill patients. Persons with adequate
facilities in their homes (e.g. private room, separate bathroom) may be permitted to stay in home
quarantine. The contracted hotels will be inspected according to criteria set by the MOPH.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for essential activities (e.g. medical care, purchase food).
• Always try to maintain a distance of at least 1.5 meters from all other persons.
• Wash your hands frequently. An alcohol-based hand rub is also effective
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides information and advice to staff of the UN system in
Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
For the sake of our frontline health care workers it is
crucial that we ALL maintain strict social distancing and
other measures to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
Watch this video and ensure you are complying with all 4
measures:
1. Maintain social distancing.
2. Wash your hands.
3. Practice respiratory hygiene.
4. Do not touch your face.
