[Let’s work together to prevent antibiotic resistance]
The Ministry of Health and Welfare (MOHW) and the Korea Centers for Disease
Control

and Prevention (KCDC) held “The First Antibiotic Resistance Prevention

Week Event” at the Seoul Riverside Hotel on Tuesday, November 14, in order to
overcome antibiotic resistance.
The World Health Organization emphasizes that efforts to overcome antibiotic
resistance are needed in a wide range of areas, including people, livestock, food,
and the environment.
In order to expand this awareness, the third week of November every year since
2015 is designated as “World Antibiotic Awareness Week”, and it is recommended
to carry out a campaign for each country.
The Korean government has participated in international efforts to prevent and
manage

antibiotics

susceptibility,

and

has

established

“National

Antibiotics

Resistance Management Measures (2016-2020)” covering healthcare, agriculture,
fisheries, food, and environment.
As part of the National Antibiotic Resistance Management Measures, this event is
meaningful not only in healthcare but also in the fields of agriculture and fisheries
and the general public, by taking part in the implementation of the measures to
ensure national policies.
In this event, a total of about 250 people including health, medicine, fisheries, and
the general public participate in the event and declare “Antibiotic Awareness
Week”.
The results of the surveys on the awareness of antibiotic resistance by doctors
and the general public are announced, and commitment to practice in each field is
confirmed.
The “Antibiotics

Resistance

Forum“

reviewed the implementation

of

National

Antibiotics Resistance Management Measures after the commemorative event, and
discuss strategies with the perspective of healthcare, livestock industry and
fisheries.
This forum also highlighted the proper use of antibiotics, the prevention of
antibiotic-resistant

bacteria,

and

“one-health

for

all”

strategies

agriculture, livestock industry, fisheries, food, and the environment.

that

include

The KCDC is promoting the development and dissemination of standard antibiotic
prescription guidelines in order to prevent antibiotic resistance development in
advance. Also, there is a strategy to reinforce infection control in medical
institutions to prevent the spread of resistant bacteria.
The standard antibiotics guidelines are being developed in cooperation with the
development of prescription support programs so that they can be widely used in
the field, and the development of major check indexes and consultation with
related institutions will continue.

