Page 1 of 3
Government of India
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Directorate General of Health Services
(EMR Division)
Guidelines for home quarantine
Scope
Detection of a travel related/unrelated suspect case of novel Coronavirus Disease (COVID-
19) will be followed by rapid isolation of such cases in designated health facilities and line
listing of all contacts of such cases.Home quarantine is applicable to all such contacts of a
suspect or confirmed case of COVID-19.
This intervention will be limited to the initial phase of India reporting only (i) travel related
cases and (ii) focal clusters arising from a travel related/unrelated case where cluster
containment strategy is adopted (iii) Persons coming from COVID-19 affected areas where
local and community transmission is evident.
Definition of contact
A contact is defined as ahealthyperson that has been in such association with aninfected
person or a contaminated environment as to have exposed and is therefore at a higher risk of
developing disease.
A contact in the context of COVID-19 is:
• A person living in the same household as a COVID-19 case;
• A person having had direct physical contact with a COVID-19 case or his/her
infectious secretions without recommended personal protective equipment (PPE) or
with a possible breach of PPE
• A person who was in a closed environment or had face to face contact with a
COVID-19 case at a distance of within1metre including air travel;
The epidemiological link may have occurred within a 14‐day period before the onset of
illness in the case under consideration.
Instructions for contacts being home quarantined
The home quarantined person should:
Stay in a well-ventilated single-room preferably with an attached/separate toilet. If another
family member needs to stay in the same room, it’s advisable to maintain a distance of at
least 1 meter between the two.
• Needs to stay away from elderly people, pregnant women, children and persons with
co-morbidities within the household.
Page 2 of 3
• Restrict his/her movement within the house.
• Under no circumstances attend any social/religious gathering e.g. wedding,
condolences, etc.
He should also follow the under mentioned public health measures at all times:
• Wash hand as often thoroughly with soap and water or with alcohol-based hand
sanitizer
• Avoid sharing household items e.g. dishes, drinking glasses, cups, eating utensils,
towels, bedding, or other items with other people at home.
• Wear a surgical mask at all the time. The mask should be changed every 6-8 hours
and disposedoff.Disposable masks are never to be reused.
• Masks used by patients / care givers/ close contacts during home care should be
disinfected using ordinary bleach solution (5%) or sodium hypochlorite solution (1%)
and then disposed of either by burning or deep burial.
• Used mask should be considered as potentially infected.
• If symptoms appear (cough/fever/difficulty in breathing), he/she should immediately
inform the nearest health centre or call 011-23978046.
Instructions for the family members of persons being home quarantined
• Only an assigned family member should be tasked with taking care of the such
person
• Avoid shaking the soiled linen or direct contact with skin
• Use disposable gloves when cleaning the surfaces or handling soiled linen
• Wash hands after removing gloves
• Visitors should not be allowed
• In case the person being quarantined becomes symptomatic, all his close contacts
will be home quarantined (for 14 days) and followed up for an additional 14days
or till the report of such case turns out negative on lab testing
Environmental sanitation
a) Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces in the quarantined person’s room (e.g.
bed frames, tables etc.) daily with 1%Sodium Hypochlorite Solution.
b) Clean and disinfect toilet surfaces daily with regular household bleach solution/phenolic
disinfectants
c) Clean the clothes and other linen used by the person separately using common household
detergent and dry.
Page 3 of 3
Duration of home quarantine
a) The home quarantine period is for 14 days from contact with a confirmed case or earlier if
a suspect case (of whom the index person is a contact) turns out negative on laboratory
testing
