Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Coronavirus (COVID-19): guidance for care staff
supporting adults with learning disabilities and
autistic adults
Published 24 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: supporting adults with learning disabilities and autistic adults
Department
of Health &
Social Care
Who this guidance is for
Contents
Who this guidance is for
Protecting yourself and the person you care for
Supporting the person through change
Maintaining your own health and wellbeing
This guidance is for care workers and personal assistants who provide support to adults with learning disabilities and
autistic adults.
This guidance aims to help care staff keep people with learning disabilities and autistic people safe, to support them to
understand the changes they need to make during the COVID-19 outbreak, and to protect their own wellbeing.
It builds on the COVID-19 adult social care action plan and more detailed guidance published by the Social Care Institute
for Excellence which will continue to be updated with resources to support those who care for people with learning
disabilities and autistic people. The advice and resources may also be helpful for those supporting people with other
needs relating to a cognitive impairment, such as dementia or mental health conditions.
When following this guidance, it is important to note that people with learning disabilities and autistic people will have
unique needs and preferences. They are more likely to need support to understand the current measures, such as the stay
at home guidance, and any changes to their care and support provision. All care and support should continue to be given
in the least restrictive way possible and continue to maximise independence wherever possible. More guidance is in the
supporting the person through changesection.
Protecting yourself and the person you care for
Keep up to date with announcements and advice on GOV.UK and follow the latest advice as set out in:
guidance on infection prevention and control, which includes advice on appropriate use of personal protective
equipment (PPE) in specific settings and general best practice to prevent infection, including effective hand hygiene
guidance for supported living and home careprovision which includes advice on delivery of care, cleaning and laundry
guidance on admission and care of people in care homes
guidance on social distancing and protecting vulnerable adults
guidance on shielding and protecting people defined as extremely vulnerable on clinical grounds
NICE and SCIE guide for managers and staff in care homes
You must also keep up to date with guidance that supports care and support planning during the outbreak, being mindful
of any updates to statutory duties. The latest advice is set out in:
easements to the Care Act
The ethical framework for adult social care
guidance on looking after people who lack mental capacity
Maintaining good hygiene practices
Detailed advice about maintaining good hygiene practices is set out in theguidance on infection prevention and control,
and the guidance for supported living and home care provision.
Important points to consider when supporting people with learning disabilities and autistic people:
Cleaning your hands frequently throughout the day by washing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using
hand sanitiser is one of the most effective ways of reducing the risk of infection. Both you and the person you support
should do this. The need for this should be explained to the person you support in the way they are most likely to
understand, and any potential skin care issues addressed.
The person you care for is likely to have a care plan which maximises self-care – this must be closely followed to
reduce the need for hands on personal care where possible.
Where guidance recommends use ofPPE, you should ensure that the person you care for understands why it is being
used.
Contingency planning
Many people caring for someone will already have contingency plans in place in case someone is unable to continue in
their caring role. If you are worried that you or your organisation do not have a plan in place, then you can make a start by:
talking to the person you support and involving them as much as possible in producing a plan and what to expect
writing down any key contacts (family, neighbours, friends or professionals) who can be called upon for assistance
making sure that information about the support the person needs is available, particularly if they would not be able to
communicate this for themselves – for example, information about specific needs, medication, routines and supplies
working with local social care and health staff such as social workers and learning disability nurses who can support you
in developing and sharing these plans
If you have symptoms of COVID-19
If you have symptoms of COVID-19, you should closely follow thestay at home guidance which provides full details of
when and how to self-isolate.
If you require alternative arrangements to be put into place at work, you should talk to your employer who will be
responsible to make arrangements. The guidance for employers sets out the processes that are in place and support that
is available.
If the person being cared for has symptoms of COVID-19
If the person being cared for has symptoms or is part of a household that is isolating, you must follow the advice set out in
the guidance for supported living and home care provisionand on the use of PPE for health and social care workers.
There are some simple steps that can be taken to protect the person you care for and reduce their risk:
closely follow the guidance on infection prevention and control to maintain good hygiene and infection control practice
provide information on who the person should call if they feel unwell, how to use the
NHS 111 online coronavirus
service and leave the number for NHS 111 prominently displayed
consider whether there are tasks that you have usually done hands-on with a person, where prompting or alternative
arrangements may now be possible instead
Caring for someone who is clinically ‘extremely vulnerable’ (shielding)
People with learning disabilities and autistic people are often at a generally higher risk of respiratory illnesses. However, a
few with very specific health conditions may be clinically defined as ‘extremely vulnerable’. The guidance on shielding and
protecting the clinically extremely vulnerable provides full details on how to care for someone who falls into this category.
The NHS in England is directly contacting people with these conditions to provide further advice. If you think the person
you care for falls into one of the categories of extremely clinically vulnerable people and they have not received a letter or
been contacted by their GP, you should discuss your concerns with their GP.
Supporting the person through change
Communication
Changes in routines and care can be particularly stressful for people with learning disabilities and autistic people, and the
measures that have been put in place during the outbreak will be bring additional challenges in how best to support and
how best to communicate change to them.
It is important that accessible information is provided to support the person you care for to understand the outbreak and
the measures introduced. There may be a need for more considered solutions, especially as the person you care for may
be anxious about the current situation. You may also need to consider how to manage behaviour that challenges,
particularly if usual techniques are not appropriate or possible during the outbreak.
There are some steps you can take and guidance you can follow to support the person you care for through change:
The principles of ‘Respect’ and ‘Inclusivity’ as outlined in theethical framework for adult social care provide useful
considerations which will support your decision making and planning.
Think about the things that can remain consistent, for example, whether it is possible to keep contact with the usual
staff who provide support with certain tasks.
Try to explain in simple and familiar terms why things are changing, emphasising what will remain normal and how long
change will likely last for.
Consider where you can support the person you care for to continue doing what they enjoy and what calms them. The
guidance on mental health and wellbeing offers examples of activities that can be done at home.
The Challenging Behaviour Foundation has helpful resources, including a visual summary ofwhat to do if the behaviour
of the person you support changes and begins to challenge.
It is important to point the person to resources which are accessible and can explain the outbreak and latest guidance,
such as:
easy read overview of COVID-19
easy read explanation of social distancing
easy read overview of shielding the clinically 'extremely vulnerable'
MENCAP resources
World Health Organization guide to effective hand-washing
music video made by people with learning disabilities to support effective handwashing
Social distancing
The guidance on social distancing sets out the restrictions in place during the COVID-19 outbreak and the circumstances
in which you are allowed to leave your home.
It is important that the person you care for understands why it is important to maintain a social distance, and what may
happen if they do not. An easy read explanation of the current guidance is available.
However, if the person in your care has a specific health condition which requires them to leave their home to maintain
good health – including if that involves reasonable specific travel beyond your local area – then they can do so. This could,
for example, include where people with learning disabilities or autistic people require specific exercise in an open space 2
or 3 times each day – ideally in line with a care plan agreed with a medical professional.
Wherever possible, you should support the person to continue their usual activities outside, in line with the
guidance on
social distancing. If it is not possible to continue their usual activities outside, alternative arrangements should be
considered. These may include accessing online services such as food delivery or online prescription orders.
You may be able to access help fromCOVID-19 Mutual Aid UK which provides voluntary support to those who are in
need. You may want to approach your local authority, who are strategically supporting these groups, so you can access
safe, appropriate support.
Coping with bereavement
It is possible that the person you care for may experience the death of someone they know during this period or may
experience anxiety at deaths reported in the media. In this instance, it is important to have open and honest discussions
about death and coping with the person you care for.
The links below provide accessible resources to support communicating death to people with learning disabilities and
autistic people:
NHS advice on coping with bereavement
Beyond Words guide for when someone dies from coronavirus
CWP NHS Trust bereavement guide for carers
MENCAP guide to dealing with bereavement
Maintaining your own health and wellbeing
It is important that you look after your own health and wellbeing as well as supporting others you care for, especially given
the potential for additional stresses at the current time. The government is committed to supporting the social care
workforce throughout the outbreak and sets out its plans in the COVID-19 adult social care action plan.
There is information in thestay at home guidance and the guidance on social distancing about looking after your
wellbeing, as well as more detailed guidance on self-care and sources of support for mental health and wellbeing during
the outbreak. You can find tips and advice for frontline health and care workers in theMindEd COVID-19 Resilience Hub.
Remember it is ok to share your concerns with others you trust and in doing so you may be able to provide support to
them too. There are sources of support and information that can help, such as NHS recommended helplines and the
Every Mind Matters website.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
The UK has left the EU
Transition period: get ready for 2021
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright
