Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Introduction and organisational preparedness
Updated 4 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: infection prevention and control (IPC)
Public Health
England
1. Introduction
This guidance outlines the infection prevention and control advice for health and social care workers involved in receiving,
assessing and caring for patients who are a possible or confirmed case of COVID-19.
This infection prevention and control advice is considered good practice in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. It is
based on the best evidence available from previous pandemic and inter-pandemic periods and focuses on the infection
prevention and control aspects of this disease only, recognising that a preparedness plan will consider other counter
measures.
Contents
1. Introduction
2. Infection, prevention and control precautions
3. Organisational preparedness for preventing and controlling COVID-19
N.B. The emerging evidence base on COVID-19 is rapidly evolving. Further updates may be made to this guidance
as new detail or evidence emerges.
The transmission of COVID-19 is thought to occur mainly through respiratory droplets generated by coughing and
sneezing, and through contact with contaminated surfaces. The predominant modes of transmission are assumed to be
droplet and contact. This is consistent with a recent review of modes of transmission of COVID-19 by the World Health
Organization (WHO).
2. Infection, prevention and control precautions
Standard infection control precautions (SICPs) and transmission based precautions (TBPs) must be used when managing
patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19.
2.1 Standard infection control precautions (SICPs) definition
SICPs are the basic infection prevention and control measures necessary to reduce the risk of transmission of infectious
agents from both recognised and unrecognised sources. Sources include blood and other body fluids, secretions and
excretions (excluding sweat), non-intact skin or mucous membranes, and any equipment or items in the care environment.
SICPs should be used by all staff, in all care settings, at all times, for all patients.
2.2 Transmission Based Precautions (TBPs) definition
TBPs are applied when SICPs alone are insufficient to prevent cross transmission of an infectious agent.TBPs are
additional infection control precautions required when caring for a patient with a known or suspected infectious agent.
TBPs are categorised by the route of transmission of the infectious agent:
Contact precautions: Used to prevent and control infection transmission via direct contact or indirectly from the
immediate care environment (including care equipment). This is the most common route of infection transmission.
Droplet precautions: Used to prevent and control infection transmission over short distances via droplets (>5µm) from
the respiratory tract of one individual directly onto a mucosal surface or conjunctivae of another individual. Droplets
penetrate the respiratory system to above the alveolar level. The maximum distance for cross transmission from droplets
has not been definitively determined, although a distance of approximately 2 metres (6 feet) around the infected individual
has frequently been reported in the medical literature as the area of risk.
Airborne precautions: Used to prevent and control infection transmission without necessarily having close contact via
aerosols (=5µm) from the respiratory tract of one individual directly onto a mucosal surface or conjunctivae of another
individual. Aerosols penetrate the respiratory system to the alveolar level. Interrupting transmission of COVID-19 requires
both droplet and contact precautions; if an aerosol generating procedure (AGP) is being undertaken then airborne
precautions are required in addition to contact precautions.
Refer to Table 1 for recommended PPE for secondary care settings
Refer to Table 2 for recommended PPE for primary, outpatient and community care settings
Refer to Table 3 for recommended PPE for ambulance, paramedics, first responders and pharmacists
Refer to Table 4 for additional considerations
3. Organisational preparedness for preventing and controlling COVID-19
Limiting transmission of COVID-19 in the healthcare setting requires a range of infection prevention and control measures
which can be considered as a hierarchy of controls. Administrative controls are implemented at an organisational level (for
example the design and use of appropriate processes, systems and engineering controls, and provision and use of
suitable work equipment and materials) to help prevent the introduction of infection and to control and limit the
transmission of infection in healthcare. The control of exposure at source, including adequate ventilation systems and
effective environmental decontamination will physically reduce exposure to infection.
Employers are under a legal obligation – underControl of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) – to adequately
control the risk of exposure to hazardous substances where exposure cannot be prevented. The provision and use of
personal protective equipment (PPE), including respiratory protective equipment (RPE), will protect staff, patients and
visitors. Employees have an obligation to make full and proper use of any control measures, including PPE, provided by
their employer.
The principles below are listed as a hierarchy of infection prevention and control measures at a local hospital/ward level.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
(Note that this list is not exhaustive but includes key principles and illustrates a useful approach to preventing and
controlling COVID-19).
Hierarchy of Control measures:
early recognition or reporting of cases
early assessment or triaging of cases
implementing control measures, including:
maintaining separation in space and or time between suspected and confirmed COVID-19 patients
educating staff, patients and visitors about SICPs and TBPs
prompt implementation of TBPs to limit transmission
restricting access of ill visitors to the facility
instructing staff members with symptoms to stay at home and not come to work until symptoms resolve
planning and implementation of strategies for surge capacity
In preparedness for implementing these control measures all healthcare organisations should undertake planning, and test
the preparedness response for the various phases of a pandemic. This includes:
an assessment of their facilities’ current capabilities. Healthcare services will not be able to operate under ‘business as
usual’ during a COVID-19 pandemic. An assessment of the practical ability to deliver care and implement control
measures under the pressure of an exceptional number of patient admissions and reduced staff numbers due to illness
must be assessed; ensuring their facilities’ most current blueprints are readily available and accessible if needed to
make necessary changes
an assessment of the current workforce
working in a multidisciplinary team with healthcare and social care leaders or managers, engineering, and clinical staff
to plan for segregation of patients and or services and creation of adequate isolation rooms; identifying potential areas
that could be converted effectively with minimum modifications
defining engineering, administrative, and personnel requirements that can be efficiently implemented during a pandemic
COVID-19 event
key areas such as emergency departments, outpatients, triage, reception desks, specialist departments will need to
have plans in place to manage patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19
patients with long term conditions who develop symptoms of COVID-19 who need to attend the hospital for treatment or
an outpatient appointment will need information on alternative arrangements
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
