HIGHLIGHTS
• Prime Minister Narendra Modi chaired a joint meeting of the Empowered
Groups (04 April) constituted for planning and ensuring implementation of
COVID-19 response activities in the country.
• ICMR to collaborate in the global WHO Solidarity Trial – an international
randomized trial of treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized patients.
• MoHFW issued an order for insurance cover for all health workers for a
period of 90 days through 'Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package: Insurance
Scheme for Health Workers Fighting COVID-I9'.
• Government of India launched a mobile app ArogyaSetu (02 April) through a
public-private partnership to enable people to assess their risk of COVID
infection (in line with privacy and data security parameters).
• WHO Country office for India is working closely with Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare (MoHFW) to strengthen COVID-19 Special Surveillance
System (S3) through the Integrated Health Information Platform (IHIP).
INDIA SITUATION
• As of 5 April 2020 (18:00 PM), according to MoHFW, a total of 3577 COVID-
19 cases, (including 65 foreign nationals) have been reported in 29
states/union territories. These include 274 who have been cured/discharged, 1 who has migrated and 83
deaths. Available here.
SITUATION IN NUMBERS
India (5.4.2020)
3 577 Confirmed
83 Deaths
29 States/UTs
South-East Asia (4.4.2020)
6 528 Confirmed
267 Deaths
Globally (4.4.2020)
1 051 635 Confirmed
56 985 Deaths
WHO RISK ASSESSMENT
Globally - Very High
WHO GLOBAL UPDATE
• World Bank’s Global Board of Executive Directors approved a fast-track $1 billion India COVID-19 Emergency
Response and Health Systems Preparedness Project to help India prevent, detect, and respond to the COVID-
19 pandemic and strengthen its public health preparedness.
• WHO EURO has given a fast track approval for the use of the Xpert® Xpress SARS-CoV-2 cartridge (Cepheid,
Sunnyvale, United States of America) to be included for COVID testing. More information here.
• WHO South-East Asia Regional Director Dr Poonam Khetrapal Singh held a virtual meeting with Health
Ministers of the Region calling for a stronger whole-of-society approach. More information here.
WHO COUNTRY UPDATE
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) continues to work closely with MoHFW, on preparedness and response
measures for COVID-19, including surveillance and contact tracing, laboratory diagnosis, risk communications and
community engagement, hospital preparedness, infection prevention and control (IPC) and implementation of
containment strategies.
• Co-ordination and Partnership: WHO is leading the Joint Response Plan (JRP) of UN agencies and partners
in line with GoI Preliminary Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). The joint plan will be expanded to include two
broad sections – Union and State level activities to support COVID-19 response.
• Surveillance: MoHFW issued a circular to all states/UTs to seek support of WHO NPSP team in rapid scale-up
of implementation of IHIP/IDSP. NCDC requested WHO team to support states/UTs in enhancing data
collection by applying revised case investigation form.
• Testing: In addition to previous targeted testing strategy, ICMR has issued advisory to start rapid antibody
based blood test for COVID-19 (4 April 2020) as a strategy for containment zone and large migration
gatherings/evacuees centres for cases of Influenza Like Illness (ILI). Locating of testing sites here.
• COVID Hospital Preparedness: WHO NPSP, TB, NTD and CVHO field teams are supporting MoHFW
state/district officials to assess functionality of more than 150 district hospitals dedicated for COVID-19.
• Capacity Building in states/UTs and districts: MoHFW with support of WHO conducted orientation on
COVID-19 preparedness, response and containment for officials in all states and UTs. The same has been
conducted in 723 out of 755 (96%) districts across India.
• Training Resources: MoHFW released guidance to states on all aspects of COVID-19 management including
WHO supported training materials, available here. MoHFW has designated NHSRC to facilitate cascading of
training for frontline health workers on their role in COVID-19. MoHFW has requested WHO India to assist with
adaptation of the content prepared for FLWs for other HR that may be mobilized for COVID-19 management.
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
• Technical queries related to COVID-19 may be emailed at technicalquery.covid19@gov.in and other queries
on ncov2019@gov.in.
• In case of any queries on COVID-19, please call at Ministry of Health & Family Welfare helpline no: +91-11-
23978046 or 1075 (Toll-free). List of helpline numbers of States/UTs on COVID-19 is also available here.
• Note: PM Modi called for public participation and light candles or diyas, torches or mobile flashlights, for 9
minutes at 9:00pm on the 5th April to show solidarity and collective resolve.
FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
WHO Country Office for India I Telephone number: +91-11- 66564800 I Email: wrindia@who.int
