Intermediate result of epidemiological investigation of Norovirus at
Horeb Training Centre

[Feb. 13 (Tues.), 2018]

□ KCDC (Director of the HQ Jeong Eun-Kyeong) have announced intermediate
results of the epidemiological investigation of Norovirus that occurred to
wide range of people at the Horeb Odaesan Youth Training Centre from
Saturday (3 Feb.), and requested that everyone follows the guidelines for
prevention.

○

Among the people who use the facility, 1,014 people were examined and,
94 people were confirmed with Norovirus.

○ As a result of epidemiological investigation, the cause of the Norovirus is
assumed to be due to the possibility of polluted water that was used for
cooking.

* (Reasons for the assumption) ① The risk of Norovirus was 6.5 times
higher than the person who did not eat the food provided by the centre.
② People confirmed with Norovirus were found among the people who
did not live in the centre but ate the food provided from the centre. ③
The faecal coliforms were found in the water which is confirmed to be
contaminated.

○

After the training centre stopped providing meals for the people there,
requested for frequent hand wash, to use the hand sanitizer etc, the
Norovirus infection reduced considerably.

□ Norovirus is an infectious disease that can be spread through human
contact and by consuming contaminated water.

○

In addition, Norovirus can be infected by touching a tap or door knobs
that was touched by a Norovirus confirmed patient and also by touching
the mouth area with a contaminated hand or eating the Norovirus
contaminated food.

○

Within 1 to 2 days after infection with Norovirus, symptoms such as
vomiting and diarrhoea occurs, and other abdominal pain and fever may
also occur.

□ KCDC has advised to follow the guideline to prevent the disease from
further spreading:

○

To

prevent

contamination

of

disease

through

the

contaminated

underground water, please drink bottled water or boiled water and when
cooking used sterilised water through contaminated ground water, drink
bottled

water

or

boiled

water,

and

use

sterilised

water

or

non-groundwater.

○ In order to prevent contamination through contaminated food, the people
who are working in a kitchen must stop the procedure of providing food
when he or she sees the symptoms such as diarrhoea and vomiting etc
among the food takers.

○ To prevent infection by hand contact, wash your hands with soap for 30
seconds or longer in running water, and keep the dining table clean.
- Cooking is prohibited for those who have symptoms such as diarrhoea,
vomiting etc. Proper hand washing with soap for over 30 seconds is
required.

