1
HIGHLIGHTS
• On 11 March, WHO declared the Novel Coronavirus Disease
(COVID-19) outbreak as a pandemic (an epidemic that has spread
worldwide affecting a large number of people).
• On the same day, per the direction of the Prime Minister of India,
a high-level Group of Ministers (GOM) was constituted to review,
monitor and evaluate the preparedness and measures taken
regarding management of COVID-19 in the country.
• Government of India has invoked powers under the Epidemic
Diseases Act, 1897 to enhance preparedness and containment of
the virus and declared COVID-19 a 'notified disaster' under the
Disaster Management Act 2005.
• Community surveillance, quarantine, isolation wards, adequate
PPEs, trained manpower, rapid response teams for COVID-19 are
being strengthened further in all States and UTs.
• All incoming travelers, including Indian nationals, arriving from or
having visited China, Italy, Iran, Republic of Korea, France, Spain
and Germany after 15 February 2020 will be quarantined for a
minimum period of 14 days, in effect from 13 March 2020 at the
port of departure.
INDIA SITUATION
As on 14 March (05:00 PM), a total of 84 cases of
COVID-19 have been reported in India (67 Indian
nationals and 17 foreign nationals*; and of the
total 10 were cured and 2 deaths reported).
So far, cases of COVID-19 have been reported from
13 States/UTs - Andhra Pradesh (1 case), Delhi (7
cases), Haryana (14 cases), Jammu & Kashmir (2
cases), Karnataka (6 cases), Kerala (19 cases),
Ladakh (3 cases), Maharashtra (14 cases), Punjab (1
case), Rajasthan (3 cases), Telangana (1 case),
Tamil Nadu (1 case) and Uttar Pradesh (12 cases)
SITUATION IN NUMBERS
India
84 Confirmed
2 Deaths
13 States/UTs
Globally
132 758 confirmed
4955 deaths
122 countries/territories
China
80 991 confirmed
3180 deaths
Outside of China
51 767 confirmed
1775 deaths
2
Death was reported in a 76-year-old male from Karnataka and 68-year-old female from Delhi,
both with co-morbidities. Hospital isolation of all confirmed cases, tracing and home quarantine
of the contacts are ongoing.
The Prime Minister's Office, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) and Cabinet
Secretary are closely monitoring the situation. All the states and UTs of India have been advised
to invoke the provisions under Section 2 of the Epidemic Disease Act 1897, which includes
special measures to be taken by the Centre to “prescribe regulations as to dangerous epidemic
disease.”
The government has declared the COVID-19 outbreak in the country a "notified disaster", in a
move called "a special one-time dispensation", to provide compensation and aid to infected
people and the families of those who died due to the virus. Funds for this and other measures
will be drawn from the Disaster Response Funds of each state (SDRF).
Travel Advisories had been issued by MoHFW from time to time. The following consolidated
advisory is presently issued.
• Starting from 13 March 2020, all existing visas, except diplomatic, official, UN/International
Organizations, employment, project visas, stand suspended until 15 April 2020.
• All incoming travelers, including Indian nationals, arriving from or having visited China, Italy,
Iran, Republic of Korea, France, Spain and Germany after 15 February 2020 will be
quarantined for a minimum period of 14 days, with effect from 1200 GMT on 13 March
2020 at the port of departure.
• All passenger movement for foreigners through all Immigration Land Check Posts at
Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and Myanmar border will be suspended from March 15, 2020
with few exceptions (Nepalese and Bhutanese nationals)
• All international passengers entering India are now required to furnish duly filled self-
declaration form and undergo universal health screening at the designated counters at all
points of entry.
• To date, total 11,71,061 passengers have been screened from 10,876 flights at 30 designated
airports. 3,062 passengers and 583 contacts were identified and referred to IDSP/ designated
hospitals. 42,296 passengers have been brought under community surveillance, out of which 2,559
were symptomatic and 522 hospitalized.
3
Through integrated disease surveillance system, a total of 28,529 persons are being monitored
under community surveillance. Laboratory capacities are being strengthened for timely
detection and potential isolation of cases. All states are on high alert, for early detection and
management of any further cases. As of 14 March, there are 52 laboratories identified by the
Indian Council of Medical Research, for testing of COVID-19. A total of 57 laboratories have
been identified to support sample collection and referral.
STATE UPDATES
As per a letter from the Ministry of Home Affairs, Rs 4 lakh will be given to the families of those whose
deaths have been linked to the COVID-19. In addition, the cost of hospitalization for those being treated
for the virus has been fixed by state governments, from the Disaster Response Funds (SDRF) of each
state.
• Local transmission of COVID-19 (infection among those with no travel history to affected
countries) have been reported in five states: Delhi, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra and
Uttar Pradesh
• Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Andhra
Pradesh have only imported cases
• Kerala released the Time-Location chart of the positive cases so that contacts can reach out
to the health service. While, in other states, tracking of contacts, home quarantine and
isolation of cases is ongoing along with other containment measures
• Places of mass gatherings like cinema theatres, malls, marriage halls, pubs, music fests,
marathons, night-clubs have been closed
4
WHO RESPONSE
Globally WHO, UN Foundation and partners launched a first-of-its-kind COVID-19 Solidarity Response
Fund on 14 March. The fund will raise money from a wide range of donors to support the work of WHO
and partners to help countries respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
On 12 March, a high-level meeting on COVID-19 was convened by WHO South-East Asia
Regional Office with participation of over 80 representatives of UN agencies and diplomatic
missions in New Delhi.
WHO Country Office for India support at national level
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) has been working closely with MoHFW, on preparedness
and response measures for COVID-19. WCO is closely working with National Centre for Diseases
Control (NCDC) on disease surveillance and the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on
risk communications. As member of the Joint Monitoring Group (JMG) on emerging diseases,
WCO has been regularly attending these meetings. JMG brings together line ministries and
agencies to provide updates as well technical guidance on preparedness and response activities
including planning for the next phase. WCO continues to provide support to ICMR on laboratory
and research protocols.
WHO Country Office for India support at state/district level
• WCO is supporting training on IPC & Cluster containment plan, surveillance and tracking of
travelers along with IDSP teams.
• Feedback and update on COVID-19 is being shared regularly by SRTLs with divisional officers,
AD health and Commissioners across affected and non-affected states. SMOs are updating DMs
& district health officials in DTFs and DWRs on a regular basis.
• State Training of Trainers (ToTs) are being held in consultation with State Ministries, Senior
leadership from National Health Missions.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
For any queries related to health, people may contact Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 24*7
helpline number (+91-11-23978046) or email at (ncov2019@gmail.com).
For more information contact:
Dr Tran Minh Nhu Nguyen
Team Lead
WHO India Email: tranminhn@who.int
Dr Ritu Chauhan
National Programme Officer
WHO India Email: chauhanr@who.int
