Annexure
(i) Ministry of Home Affairs (including NDMA, NDRF, CAPFs, Bureau of Immigration,
Land Port Authority of India etc.)
a. Identification of facilities/buildings that can be used as quarantine centres or can be
converted to temporary hospitals with isolation facilities;
b. Bureau of Immigration to provide regular and timely information (together with
contact details) on international travellers arriving in India through airports, ports and
land border crossings;
c. NDMA/NDRFmay ensure continuity of essential services, conduct training
workshops, mock-drills and awareness generation exercises particularly at Points of
Entry in coordination with CISF;
d. Bureau of Immigration to ensure prompt and strict implementation of Visa restrictions
issued from time to time;
e. Maintenance of law and order and essential services.
(ii) Ministry of External Affairs
a. Convey situational update(s) from affected countries in terms of number of cases,
their spatial and temporal distribution and trendsetc;
b. Provide information on travelers arriving from affected countries, especially Indians;
c. Issue of advisories to Indians in other countries;
d. Ensure prompt and proper implementation of Visa restrictions issued;
e. Advise on impact of trade and travel restrictions for India;
f. Monitor and take necessary action to ensure that unnecessary travel / trade restrictions
are not imposed on India by other countries;
g. Maintaining contact with Indians citizens in foreign countries and ensuring provision
of appropriate medical/treatment and other facilities to them.
(iii) Ministry of Defence
a. Identify facilities/buildings that can be used as quarantine centres or can be converted
to temporary hospitals with isolation facilities;
b. Support in extending network of hospital and laboratory facilities by permitting use of
facilities by civilians;
c. Contribute to the pool of public health experts by identifying experts/faculties within
Armed Forces;
d. Train faculty of Armed Forces Medical colleges/Cantonment hospitals/Station Health
Officers on COVID-19 preparedness and response
e. Disseminate public health messages to its organizations as well as general community
on preventive public health measures like respiratory and hand hygiene and prompt
identification and reporting of symptoms.
(iv) Ministry of Railways
a.Identify facilities/buildings that can be used as quarantine centers or can be converted to
temporary hospitals with isolation facilities;
b.Support in extending network of hospital and laboratory facilities by permitting their use
by general public;
c.Disseminate public health messages at railway stations and on trains;
d.Contribute to the pool of public health experts by identifying experts/faculties in their
organizations;
e.Facilitate transportation of essential commodities including medical supplies;
(v) Ministry of Labour (ESIC)
a. Identify facilities/buildings that can be used as quarantine centers or can be converted to
temporary hospitals with isolation facilities;
b. Support in extending network of hospital and laboratory facilities by permitting their use
by general public;
c. Disseminate awareness on preventive measures at all subordinate offices, hospitals and
clinics
(vi) Ministry of Civil Aviation
a. Ensure strict compliance with screening protocol for international travelers, as decided,
andshare such information with relevant stakeholders;
b. Display prominently public health messages at all offices and airports.
c. Facilitate establishment and proper maintenance of earmarked aerobridges.
d. Ensure that all airlines are made aware of the precautionary measures to be undertaken,
and are trained in management of onboard suspect cases, making appropriate in-flight
announcements, and in filling up of self-declaration forms by all travelers and. Crew;
e. Facilitate transportation of essential commodities including medical supplies.
(vii) Ministry of Shipping
a. Ensure strict compliance with screening protocol for international travelers, as decided,
at all ports and share such information with relevant stakeholders;
b. Display prominently public health messages at all offices and ports;
c. Ensure that shipping industry, particularly cruise ships are made aware of the
precautionary measures to be undertaken, and are trained in management of on-board
suspect cases, and filling up of self-declaration forms by all travelers and crew;
d. Facilitate transportation of essential commodities including medical supplies
(viii) Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
a. Ensure sanitation measures and public display of health messages at all offices and
community level outlets;
b. Maintain essential supplies
(ix) Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
a. Develop comprehensive media strategy / plan to disseminate information about the
virus, which may include addressing rumours/myths particularly on social media;
b. Roll out appropriate communication materials for National and State campaign
(including translation in local languages) and facilitate availability of slots for media
communication in print / visual media.
c. Utilize the field publicity units for social mobilization.
(x) Department of Pharmaceuticals
a. Maintain situational awareness on supply and demand of essential APIs and act well
in advance to avoid crisis situation
b. Regulate drugs required for COVID Pandemic.
c. Address production of such drugs as maybe recommended by MOHFW.
(xi) Directorate General Foreign Trade
a. Monitor the export of essential APIs/drugs/masks etc. and implement export
restrictions as approved from time to time;
b. Facilitate import of essential APIs/drugs etc.in consultation with Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare
(xii) Department of Science and Technology/ Biotechnology
a. Support in extending network of laboratory facilities;
b. Support research for diagnostics and vaccines;
c. Support their adequate availability in India
(xiii) Indian Council of Medical Research
a. Extend network of laboratory facilities to ensure timely testing even at remote
locations
b. Support research for diagnostics and vaccines
c. Support their adequate availability in India
(xiv) Ministry of Panchayati Raj
a. Facilitate Gram Panchayats and Panchayat Samiti Meetings to spread awareness on
COVID-19;
b. Facilitate environmental sanitation at village through Village Health and Sanitation
Committee
(xv) Ministry of Housing & Urban Development Department
a. Identify facilities/buildings that can be used as quarantine centers or can be converted
to temporary hospitals with isolation facilities
b. Ensure that all Urban Local Bodies maintain environmental sanitation;
c. Display hoardings/banners with related IEC content all prominent places and in places
of congregation.
(xvi) Ministry of Women & Child Development
a. Facilitate utilization of Anganwadi workers and supervisors in surveillance and other
community level activities by MoHFW
b. Facilitate mobilization of Self-Help Groups(SHGs) to create awareness
c. Proper sanitation at Anagnwadi centers and health education to children and their
parents
(xvii) Ministry of Transport
a. Ensure sanitation of seats, handles & bars of all public transport vehicles;
b. Display of public health messages on public transport vehicles
(xviii) Ministry of Textiles
a. Ensure availability of medical textiles and equipment particularly PPEs
b. Develop and implement short and long term plans to ensure availability of PPEs in
India particularly in terms of their manufacture, standardization and testing
(xix) Ministry of Minority Affairs
a. Identify facilities/buildings that can be used as quarantine centers or can be converted
to temporary hospitals with isolation facilities;
b. Disseminate public health messages at all subordinate and field offices.
(xx) Ministry of Tourism
a. Identify facilities/buildings that can be used as quarantine centers or can be converted
to temporary hospitals with isolation facilities;
b. Facilitate surveillance activities especially in respect of international travelers
c. Adhere to guidelines on environmental sanitation
d. Disseminate public health messages at all hotels
e. Maintain vigil particularly in major tourist spots and towns across the country.
