Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Coronavirus (COVID-19): Q&A for people receiving a
personal budget or personal health budget
Published 21 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Coronavirus (COVID-19): guidance for people receiving direct payments
Department
of Health &
Social Care
Contents
Who this Q&A is for
Flexible use of direct payments during the pandemic
Continuation of direct payments
Personal protective equipment (PPE)
Employment of individuals
Statutory sick pay (SSP) for PAs
Monitoring requirements
Who this Q&A is for
This Q&A is aimed at people who receive support via personal budgets or personal health budgets – and take this via a
direct payment. It is also relevant to individuals employed via the direct payment, family members, local authorities, clinical
commissioning groups (CCGs) and providers.
It sets out key messages to support planning and responding to the international pandemic, help slow the transmission of
the coronavirus (COVID-19) and reduce the possibility of hospital admission as the outbreak progresses across the
country.
It takes into account thelatest advice issued by governmentand the COVID-19: ethical framework for adult social care.
This Q&A has been developed by the Department of Health and Social Care (
DHSC) based on questions and concerns
raised by members of the public. It has been contributed to by multiple departments, organisations and charities, including
Think Local Act Personal, In-Control, Skills for Care, and NHS England and NHS Improvement, including the Personalised
Care Strategic Coproduction Group.
This Q&A will be a working document and will be regularly updated to take into account any new guidance published, and
also to respond to any new issues or concerns raised by members of the public. For any concerns or questions that are
not reflected within this guidance (or other published guidance), please submit these to
pa.framework@skillsforcare.org.uk. These will be considered for future iterations.
It should be read alongside the nationalguidance for individuals receiving care and support through direct payments
.
Flexible use of direct payments during the pandemic
What are the expectations around the flexible use of direct payments?
During the pandemic, we expect local authorities,CCGs and direct payment holders to adopt a more flexible approach to
the use of direct payments. COVID-19 is an exceptional circumstance, and it is vital that we make sure individuals who
take their budget as a direct payment, continue to receive the support they require that can keep them healthy, well, and
out of hospital.
As far as possible, direct payments should continue to be used as agreed to within the care and support plan. However,
there may be circumstances during the pandemic where this is not possible, for example, through staff absence.
In these circumstances, individuals should raise and discuss this with their health or social care team, including their local
authority or CCG. However, we are aware that given the current pressures on the system, it may take longer for the
relevant organisation or person to respond to a request to change the use of the direct payment. Therefore, in
circumstances where there is clear rationale that enables the individual to keep safe and prevent admission to hospital,
local authorities and CCGs should be willing to give the individual more flexibility in how they use their direct payment,
with the guiding principle being ensuring that they safely receive the care and support they require.
Where necessary, this flexibility should include suspension or reduced restrictions on spend of the existing payment
allocation. All flexibility should follow the relevant guidance, for example the COVID-19: ethical framework for adult social
care.
When taking any decisions on using the direct payment differently during the pandemic, individuals must retain any
receipts or evidence of use as they would do for purchases normally made, and a log of how their direct payment was
used that they can then discuss with their local authority or CCG following the pandemic.
Can people use unspent direct payment allocation (sometimes known as contingency funds) or
access emergency funding from their local authority or CCG?
Yes. In exceptional circumstances, unspent allocation can be used to ensure that the appropriate care and support is
provided. Use of this funding should be recorded within a log, with the relevant receipts or evidence also kept in order to
justify the spend to the local authority or CCG once the pandemic is over.
As is normal protocol, emergency funds must be made by requests through theCCG or local authority. Any request for
additional emergency funding necessary as a result of COVID-19, should be prioritised.
Continuation of direct payments
Self-funders
Keeping safe
Given the pandemic, will my personal budget or personal health budget direct payment be stopped?
No. Except in extreme circumstance, your existing personal budget or personal health budget should continue.
If your direct payment is stopped due to an extreme circumstance, the local authority orCCG should explain that to you,
and discuss alternative arrangements with you in order to ensure you receive the care and support you require.
What might be different about how personal health budgets or personal budgets are delivered, in the
current context?
In some cases, the care and support in place may need amending given current guidance and rules around isolation.
Needs may have to be met in a different way, for example accessing exercise classes through technology, rather than in
community settings.
Local authorities and CCGs have also been encouraged to consider providing longer-term payments (for example,
quarterly, rather than monthly) that can reduce administrative burden and provide the individual with greater flexibility.
Therefore, the amount you may receive in your direct payment, may be different to normal.
If I am admitted to hospital, will my direct payment continue?
In line with normal practice, this will be dependent on your condition and circumstances, length of stay, and any
extenuating circumstances that mean your needs have changed and are no longer as set out in the care and support plan.
However, a temporary stay in hospital should not necessarily mean that the direct payment should cease – and direct
payments are often conducive to helping people to return home safely, as soon as possible.
Can my carer or PA support me in hospital, if I am admitted?
We understand that you may prefer some personal care tasks to be undertaken by your carer or personal assistant (
PA)
rather than hospital staff, which the direct payment can usually allow.
While people’s preferences will be taken into account, the measures taken to combat the current pandemic means that
access to hospitals for anybody who is not a patient or member of staff, is limited. It therefore may not be possible for your
carer or PA to support you in hospital, during this period. Rules and guidance issued by the hospital will provide further
information on what is possible.
If your carer orPA is able to support you in hospital, they will be subject to infection control measures as is normal
practice. In no circumstance should the personal care interfere with the medical treatment. Carers, PAs or anybody
supporting you must adhere to the guidance set by government and the hospital around supporting people when in acute
care.
Carers and PAs will have a vital role to play upon discharge. Separate guidance has been published on thedischarge
process in place during the pandemic.
Should I develop a contingency plan?
While not a formal requirement, we strongly recommend that everybody with a direct payment develops a contingency
plan, or updates their existing plan, to ensure their needs can continue to be met. If you already engage with a direct
payment support organisation as part of your care and support, it may be possible for them to support you in developing
this plan.
This plan should be discussed and agreed with your local authority orCCG where possible, and then exercised when
necessary. Elements to consider within this plan include:
staffing – identify options for alternative arrangements where those who are employed via a direct payment cannot work
in their usual way. Longer shift patterns and less frequent handovers could also be considered, taking into account any
additional pressures being placed on the individual
alternative provision – when elements of the care and support are unable to be delivered (such as accessing exercise
classes in the community), use of other avenues should be explored (for example, the use of indoor exercise classes
and the use of technology)
alternative networks of support – the identification and contact with extended family and/or friends and/or volunteers
may need to be considered as part of any emergency contingency plan to keep safe and avoid acute admission, so that
people can stay at home. Be mindful that information, advice and training may be needed
upskilling of existing staff – identify what possible additional training or support there is for existing staff members. This
does not necessarily have to be through face-to-face training – it could be through peer learning or e-learning
A template contingency plan can be found inAnnex A.
Local authorities and CCGs should consider how direct payments and personalised care and support plans can be made
more flexible during the pandemic, including consideration of emergency or one-off payments, and greater flexibility about
the use of unspent direct payment allocation where necessary. Local authorities and CCGs should also consider having a
single point of contact for direct payment holders to contact, in order to agree contingency plans and discuss any
necessary additional emergency payments.
Following the pandemic, local authorities and CCGs should follow up with direct payment holders to discuss the use of the
direct payment during this period. Individuals must be able to reasonably justify the use of their direct payment during this
period, providing receipts and evidence of use, and keep a log of how their payment was used.
Personal protective equipment (PPE)
Is my PA eligible to receive PPE?
Yes. If you or any member of your household is symptomatic or has a confirmed case of COVID-19, and your
PA will be
providing direct care, PPE is required, and the PA, as an essential worker, will be eligible to receive that. Furthermore, if
your PA normally receives PPE to support you, this should continue.
More detail on who should provide thisPPE is set out below.
Can I use my direct payment to buy PPE for PAs I employ?
If your existing direct payment contains funding to purchasePPE for your PA, you should continue to use that funding to
purchase PPE.
If you, or yourPA, cannot obtain PPE in this way, or your direct payment is not set up to fundPPE, you should ask for
assistance from the local authority or CCG that provides your direct payment who should help you to get thePPE you
require.
What PPE should my PA be using?
The following answers presume that care is taking place in a household setting. If you are receivingPA support in another
setting please find the relevant guidance at COVID-19: infection prevention and control (IPC).
PAs should use the guidance from Public Health England (
PHE) when determining what PPE is appropriate to wear. See
the guidance for home care.
In short, the guidance sets out that:
if neither yourself nor any members of your household are symptomatic, or are confirmed cases of COVID-19, your
PA
is not required to use any further PPE than they would normally
if you or any members of your household are symptomatic or are a confirmed case of COVID-19, but your
PA will not
be within close proximity providing direct care (for example dropping off shopping), PPE is not required. However
proper handwashing is essential
if you or any members of your household are symptomatic or are a confirmed case of COVID-19, and your
PA will be
within close proximity providing direct care (for example washing and bathing), the PA requires gloves, a fluid-resistant
(Type IIR) surgical mask and an apron for each episode of direct care. Where there is a risk of secretions (for example
splashing or exposure to respiratory droplets) workers also require eye protection
if you or any members of your household are in the ‘extremely vulnerable’ category undergoing shielding, any visit or
care from a PA requires, as a minimum, single-use disposable plastic aprons, surgical mask and gloves. See the
guidance on shielding for more details on who this category includes
new PPE must be used for each episode of care. It is essential thatPPE is stored securely within disposable rubbish
bags. These bags should be placed into another bag, tied securely and kept separate from other waste within the room.
This should be put aside for at least 72 hours before being put in the usual household waste bin
What are the safety procedures when using PPE?
PPE is only effective if it used correctly.PHE has produced a number of resources that explain howPPE can be safely
used to minimise the spread of infection. See the guidance on how to usePPE effectively.
What about family members, will they receive PPE if they are providing care and support?
First, we would encourage all unpaid carers and family members looking after loved ones to continue to follow the general
hygiene guidance provided by the government, including washing their hands and cleaning frequently used surfaces.
Where people are taking on care work in a voluntary capacity, and the person being cared for or anyone in their household
is symptomatic or has confirmed COVID-19 (or indeed has any other condition that is potentially infectious), or is in the
‘shielded’ category, then they should also be able to access, and use, PPE.
Guidance on what PPE is appropriate to use.
Employment of individuals
What do I do if my PA(s) becomes sick or is unable to work? How do we both keep safe?
If your PA becomes sick or needs to self-isolate and cannot support you as contracted, you or somebody on your behalf
should try to organise alternative arrangements. For example, it may be that another PA you employ is able to take on
further work and there is sufficient insurance in place for them to do so, or there may be another PA that is familiar with
your care and support plan, that can support you.
If other arrangements cannot be put in place, it will be necessary to put your contingency plan into action. This may mean
family members stepping in and supporting you to receive the care and support you need. Local authorities and CCGs
should adopt a flexible approach to how the care and support plan is delivered during this period, to ensure that
appropriate care and support is possible.
In cases where arrangements cannot be put in place to enable you to receive the necessary care and support, you should
contact your local authority or CCG immediately. They will support in developing a temporary plan to ensure your needs
are met in the interim, while your PA is recovering. You may wish to also speak to your insurance company, who can offer
advice for this scenario.
If your PA is concerned that they may have COVID-19 they should use theNHS 111 coronavirus service. If they need to
self-isolate at home, they should not visit and care for you or provide support until it is safe to do so.
They should also follow theguidance on home care provision.
Can family carers or close friends be paid out of the agreed direct payment if PAs are not available?
We recognise that during this pandemic, short-term emergency changes may be necessary. Families and close friends
may need to be called on for support beyond any unpaid care and support they may already be providing. They may be
able to provide this support on a voluntary basis for a short period of time, where there is a gap in care and support
provision – for example, through staff sickness.
We also recognise that this may not be viable or sustainable in the longer term, if the situation is ongoing. In these
circumstances therefore, consideration could be given to paying the family member or close friend from the direct
payment.
If you feel it’s necessary for family members to become your care and support workers, this should be raised and agreed
with the local authority or CCG who make these decisions on a case-by-case basis. Local authorities andCCGs should
acknowledge the vulnerable nature of people’s needs and should have systems and processes in place to be able to
respond as quickly as possible and support you to make arrangements to continue to manage your care. Only in cases of
emergency, and where time-critical, you should be able to decide to put a suitable package of care and support in place
for a short period, for example 4 weeks, as long as you can justify and evidence this retrospectively.
If you think this may be necessary during the pandemic, you should include this when developing your contingency plan.
This should be discussed with your local authority or CCG in advance of use. In deciding whether funding from your
existing direct payment should be used for family members and close friends who may need to be called on for support
beyond any unpaid care and support they may already be providing, it is important to consider the following:
routine employment and payroll processes will need to be followed, including adherence to agreed hours and pay rates
in the personalised care and support plan
consider whether there is any additional training and assessment of competence required
any employment law issues related to the rights of existing paid care workers or
PAs
any additional costs involved if existing employees are entitled to ongoing pay
if family members take on paid care and support work this could impact on any benefits they receive
family members are often already providing significant levels of care and support
consideration should be taken of the impact on family members’ health and wellbeing and whether any unreasonable
strain is being put on them
if the family member is also the direct payment recipient and the employer there can be a conflict of interest. In these
instances, employment of the family member through an agency or third party may be a solution
any impact it may have on relationships if the family member is also an employee
What is the government’s expectation on furloughing of PAs?
In general, the government expects that the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme will not be used by many public sector
organisations, or individuals who employ people through funding provided to them as a direct payment. This is because
the majority of public sector employees are continuing to provide essential public services or contribute to the response to
the coronavirus outbreak. The government considers PAs to be an essential worker, and as such, furloughing of this
cohort should be minimal.
Where employers receive public funding for staff costs, and that funding is continuing, we therefore expect employers to
use that money to continue to pay staff in the usual fashion – and correspondingly not furlough them. This also applies to
non-public sector employers who receive public funding for staff costs.
In a small number of cases, for example where it is not possible for yourPA to deliver the care and support you require,
and where they cannot be redeployed to assist with the coronavirus response, the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme
may be appropriate. You will need to explain why this is the case when processing your claim for furlough.
If I think the scheme might be appropriate for me, with my circumstances, what do I do?
As above, it’s generally advisable for individuals to continue their current care arrangements wherever possible, putting in
additional precautions in relation to hygiene and infection control.
There are some points that could be considered to help make a decision about what’s best for you and your care
arrangements. For example:
if you decide to stopPAs from coming into your home, depending on their employment contract they may be entitled to
full pay. They are not automatically entitled to be furloughed under the government’s Coronavirus Job Retention
Scheme, as the work may still be available. Where family or friends are willing to provide care on a voluntary basis
there will be no added costs to the budget during this time. This could be considered for a short period, for example 4
weeks, and then reviewed with your local authority or CCG
if family or friends are unable to provide care on a voluntary basis and require payment for this, this is an added cost
pressure to the budget and would need to be agreed with the individual’s local authority or CCG, with the necessary
budget adjustments made. This could be considered for a short period, for example 4 weeks, and then reviewed with
your local authority or CCG
in either of the situations above,PAs could be considered for re-deployment to provide voluntary support to other
people, for example assisting with personal care, activities of daily living, shopping, getting medications and
prescriptions
In all circumstances it’s advisable where possible that people speak with their local authority orCCG before making any
formal changes.
General support on business questions can also be found ingovernment FAQs or over the phone, Monday to Friday, from
9am to 6pm on 0300 456 3565.
Can my direct payment be used to cover additional expenses incurred by my PA during the
pandemic, for example, car park charges if they are unable to travel by public transport?
In some circumstances, this will be appropriate, and necessary in order for you to receive the care and support you require
during the pandemic (if your PA could not reach your home without using their own car, as public transport is reduced). It’s
vital that you continue to receive the care and support you need to remain at home, avoiding admission to hospital – and
we recognise that much of the support is delivered by essential workers like PAs.
You will need to judge the appropriateness and cost-effectiveness of incurring reasonable additional expenses. If in doubt,
you should discuss this with your local authority or CCG. As throughout this Q&A, if there’s clear rationale that the decision
taken will enable you to keep safe and prevent admission to hospital, the decision is time-critical, and you cannot get in
touch with your local authority or CCG within the time you have to make that decision, you should feel able to make this
decision and provide receipts, evidence and justification retrospectively.
Can I re-employ previous PAs who already have the training to support me, in these emergency
situations
Yes, if required (for example throughPA illness) then you could contact a previousPA, who may be able to provide
temporary cover, and will be familiar with your needs. This should make up part of your emergency contingency plan. You
should consider whether there’s any additional training and assessment of competence or upskilling necessary (such as
peer learning or e-learning) to get them up to speed as quickly as possible.
Given the social distancing measures, will all PAs have official documentation to show they’re doing
essential work?
No. Government guidance is clear that anybody is permitted to travel to and from work if it is not possible to work from
home. There is not special status for key workers in this respect. This is reiterated in guidance to police officers issued by
the National Police Chief’s Council and the College of Policing. No documentation is required to prove travel to and from
work is necessary.
Where the definition of key workers is relevant is regarding access to other provisions, such as care for children at local
schools if they cannot safely be cared for at home. As key workers, PAs are eligible for this support.
If a PA does not feel confident moving around without documentation (even though it is not required) they should ask their
employer or direct payment provider for a letter explaining the role they play and how this links to the guidance published
on who falls into a key worker category. This letter could also include a phone number of the PAs employer, who can
confirm their role if necessary. An example template can be found in Annex B.
What financial or employment support will I have?
If you receive your budget as a direct payment, you should continue to receive the amount as was or has been agreed to
by your local authority or CCG. There are a range of steps local authorities andCCGs should take in relation to this.
These can be found within the direct payment guidance.
The government have also implemented a range of measures designed to support individuals who have direct payments.
These include implementing statutory sick pay (SSP) from day one (including for those employed via a direct payment),
bringing forward legislation to allow small and medium-sized businesses to reclaim SSP paid for sickness absence due to
COVID-19, and deploying volunteers to support people at home.
See more information about this package of measures
.
Statutory sick pay (SSP) for PAs
If my PA must self-isolate, will they get paid SSP?
Yes, if they’re eligible (earn over £118 per week). They will be paid from day one rather than the fourth day of their illness.
See more information on the eligibility criteria.
If my PA says they’re self-isolating, do I need them to provide me with a fit note from the doctor or
NHS 111?
If your PA says they’re self-isolating, they will not be able to go to their doctor and are being asked not to call NHS 111
unless they really need to. You do not need evidence from your PA to be able to claim SSP for them. If they are self-
isolating and then become sick, they should let you know (by telephone not in person).
If my PA is self-isolating and I need to pay SSP, will I get it refunded?
Yes. SSP will be paid out through payroll and claimed back via HMRC. Your payroll provider will deal with this for you.
This refund will be for up to 2 weeks per employee.
Monitoring requirements
Will my budget continue to be reviewed?
Yes, although during the pandemic, reviewing may not occur as frequently as it has previously. Local authorities and
CCGs will take a proportionate approach to reviewing how direct payments have been spent. Records should be kept as
normal for when the next review takes place.
If you’re concerned that the amount allocated to you within your direct payment is not enough, or is too much, you should
get in touch directly with your local authority or CCG, who have duties to ensure the funding allocated is appropriate to
meet your assessed need.
Am I expected to continue to evidence my spend?
Yes. As is normal practice, you should keep hold of any receipts or evidence that show how the direct payment has been
used. These will be necessary within the next discussion with your CCG or local authority.
Self-funders
What support do I have if I pay for my own care?
If you are using your own money to employ aPA you should follow the general guidance given here and in thedirect
payment guidance around contingency planning, and health and safety.
Should you find yourself in a position where these arrangements are unable to support you due to the wider impact of
COVID-19 and you have no alternative arrangements available to you, you should contact your local authority to discuss
alternative care and support arrangements.
Keeping safe
What should employers do if their PA refuses to isolate, when they have suspected coronavirus?
Where can employers go to for advice?
If your PA is showing symptoms of COVID-19, they should immediately self-isolate as per the guidance issued by
government. Under no circumstances should anybody showing symptoms continue to provide face-to-face care.
If they (or anybody else you meet) refuse to isolate, you should immediately speak to your local authority or
CCG, who
should support you to enforce this.
What are the procedures for infection control in the house?
If those employed through a budget undertake cleaning duties, then they should use the usual household products, such
as detergents and bleach. These products are very effective at getting rid of viruses on surfaces. Frequently touched
surfaces should be cleaned regularly.
Personal waste (for example used tissues, continence pads and other items soiled with bodily fluids) and disposable
cleaning cloths should be stored securely within disposable rubbish bags. These bags should then be placed into another
bag, tied securely and kept separate from other waste within the room. This should be put aside for at least 72 hours
before being put in the usual household waste bin for disposal as normal.
Dirty laundry should not be shaken before washing. This minimises the possibility of dispersing the virus through the air.
Items should then be washed as appropriate, in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. All dirty laundry can be
washed in the same load. If you do not have a washing machine, wait a further 72 hours after the 7-day isolation period
(for individual isolation) or a 14-day isolation period (for households) has ended. The laundry can then be taken to a public
launderette. Items heavily soiled with body fluids, for example vomit or diarrhoea, or items that cannot be washed, should
be disposed of, with your consent.
See further guidance on laundry and waste disposal.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
