Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Occupational health and staff deployment
Updated 4 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: infection prevention and control (IPC)
Public Health
England
Prompt recognition of cases of COVID-19 among healthcare staff is essential to limit the spread.
Health and social care staff with symptoms of COVID-19 should not come to work.
As a general principle, healthcare staff who provide care in areas for suspected or confirmed patients should not care for
other patients. However, this has to be a local decision based on local epidemiology and the configuration of the
organisation.
A risk assessment is required for health and social care staff at high risk of complications from COVID-19, including
pregnant staff. Employers should:
discuss with employees who are at risk or are pregnant the need to be deployed away from areas used for the care of
those who have, or are clinically suspected of having, COVID-19; or, in the primary care setting, from clinics set up to
manage people with COVID-19 symptoms. Refer to the guidance published by the Royal College of Obstetricians &
Gynaecology.
ensure that advice is available to all health and social care staff, including specific advice to those at risk from
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
complications.
Bank, agency and locum staff should follow the same deployment advice as permanent staff.
As part of their employer’s duty of care, providers have a role to play in ensuring that staff understand and are adequately
trained in safe systems of working, including donning and doffing of personal protective equipment. A fit testing
programme should be in place for those who may need to wear respiratory protection
In the event of a breach in infection control procedures, staff should be reviewed by occupational health.
Occupational health departments should lead on the implementation of systems to monitor staff illness and absence.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
