Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
PHE statement regarding NERVTAG review and
consensus on cardiopulmonary resuscitation as an
aerosol generating procedure (AGP)
Updated 27 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: infection prevention and control (IPC)
Public Health
England
1. Purpose and scope
This explains PHE’s application of the review and consensus published by theNew and Emerging Respiratory Virus
Threats Advisory Group (NERVTAG) on 24 April 2020, regarding whether cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) by chest
Contents
1. Purpose and scope
2. NERVTAG
3. PHE’s application of the NERVTAG consensus statement on CPR as an AGP
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
The UK has left the EU
Transition period: get ready for 2021
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
compressions and defibrillation is associated with an increased risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections and
should be considered to be aerosol generating procedures (AGPs).
2. NERVTAG
NERVTAG advises the government on the threat posed by new and emerging respiratory viruses.
On 24 April 2020, NERVTAGpublished its evidence review and consensus regarding CPR as an AGP
3. PHE’s application of the NERVTAG consensus statement on CPR as an
AGP
NERVTAG was asked to undertake an evidence review to consider whether chest compressions and defibrillation are
associated with an increased risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections. NERVTAG was also asked to give an
opinion on whether chest compressions and defibrillation should be considered to be aerosol generating procedures.
Having reviewed all the available evidence, NERVTAG stated: “It is biologically plausible that chest compressions could
generate an aerosol, but only in the same way that an exhalation breath would do. No other mechanism exists to generate
an aerosol other than compressing the chest and an expiration breath, much like a cough, is not currently recognised as a
high-risk event or an AGP.” NERVTAG also stated that it “does not consider that the evidence supports chest
compressions or defibrillation being procedures that are associated with a significantly increased risk of transmission of
acute respiratory infections.”
Based on this evidence review, theUK IPC guidance therefore will not be adding chest compressions to the list of AGPs.
Healthcare organisations may choose to advise their clinical staff to wear FFP3 respirators, gowns, eye protection and
gloves when performing chest compressions but we strongly advise that there is no potential delay in delivering this life
saving intervention. Table 4 in the revised PPE guidance recommends clinicians wear PPE during sessions in all settings
when they assume there is widespread transmission in the community.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
