Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Promotional material
Coronavirus: stay at home, protect the NHS, save
lives - web version
Published 7 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Coronavirus (COVID-19) information leaflet
Department
of Health &
Social Care
Stay at home
The single most important action you can take is to stay at home in order to protect the NHS and save lives.
Contents
Stay at home
Symptoms
Advice for those who are 70 and over, have an underlying health condition or are pregnant
Support for businesses and workers
Going to work
You should only leave the house for very limited reasons:
shopping for basic necessities, for example food and medicine, as infrequently as possible
one form of exercise a day, for example a run, walk, or cycle - alone or with members of your household
any medical need, including to donate blood, avoid risk of harm, provide care or help a vulnerable person
travelling for work purposes, but only where you cannot work from home
These are exceptions – and when doing these activities, you should minimise time spent outside of the home and ensure
you are 2 metres apart from anyone outside of your household.
Critical workers, and parents of vulnerable children, may leave the house to take their children to and from school or their
childcare provider. More detail is available online. Children can be moved between homes if their parents live separately.
Help stop the infection spreading and support each other:
wash your hands with soap and water often – do this for at least 20 seconds
cover your mouth and nose with a tissue or your sleeve (not your hands) when you cough or sneeze
put used tissues in the bin immediately and wash your hands afterwards
don’t touch your eyes, nose or mouth if your hands are not clean
clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces and objects in your home, such as door handles and taps
shop responsibly, follow advice in stores, and only buy what you need for yourself and your family, and those you’re
supporting
How to wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds
Symptoms
You may have coronavirus if you have either of the following symptoms, however mild:
a high temperature
a new, continuous cough
Anyone who has these symptoms must stay at home until the symptoms have ended, and in all cases for at least 7 days.
Everyone else in the household must stay at home for at least 14 days after the first person’s symptoms appear, even if
they themselves do not have symptoms. If anyone else develops symptoms during that time, that individual must stay
home for an additional 7 days from when they developed symptoms. Once 7 days have passed and provided symptoms
have ended, they no longer need to isolate.
Do not go to a GP surgery, pharmacy or hospital.
Use NHS online services. Only call 111 if you are not able to get online, you have been instructed to call, or your
symptoms worsen.
Call 999 if you have a serious or life-threatening emergency, and tell the call adviser if you have coronavirus
symptoms.
An example of how coronavirus can spread in a household
Person A develops symptoms, triggering 7 days of isolation for herself and 14 days for others in her household.
Person A’s isolation ends after 7 days, if her symptoms have stopped.
From the time person A first develops symptoms:
person B develops symptoms on day 3 so they must isolate for 7 days from day 3
person B’s isolation ends on day 10, as long as their symptoms have stopped by day 9
person C has no symptoms so their 14-day isolation ends on day 15
person D develops symptoms on day 13. Their 7-day isolation starts on day 13
person D’s isolation ends on day 20, as long as their symptoms have stopped by day 19
Advice for those who are 70 and over, have an underlying health condition
or are pregnant
People who are 70 and over, or those who have an underlying health condition, are likely to be more seriously affected. It
is even more important that you protect yourself now by following the advice above.
If you are at very high risk due to a serious underlying health condition, you should have already received a letter from the
NHS containing specific guidance about what to do.
If you need shopping or medication, ask family, friends or neighbours to drop these at the door, or if possible, order online.
Use NHS online services or the NHS App to book appointments or order repeat prescriptions – only phone if this is not
possible.
GP consultations should be done over the phone or online, to minimise risk to you and other patients. GP practices may
postpone non-urgent health checks or routine appointments.
There is helpful information and advice for pregnant women about coronavirus on the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists’ website.
Support for businesses and workers
The government knows that all these measures have a huge impact on businesses, households and people across the
country and has taken action to protect lives and incomes.
For businesses:
more than £330 billion is being made available in loans and guarantees
another £20 billion is being given to businesses through tax relief and cash grants
HMRC is deferring VAT payments for the next quarter
For workers and families:
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme means employees can receive 80% of their wages up to a maximum of £2,500
per month
the Coronavirus Self Employment Income Support Scheme will provide a grant to most self-employed individuals or
partnerships, worth 80% of their profits up to a cap of £2,500 per month
extra support for the unemployed and those on low incomes through Universal Credit and Tax Credits, worth up to
£1,040
nearly £1 billion of additional support for renters
mortgage holidays of three months for anyone in difficulty due to coronavirus, including owners of buy to let properties
This is just some of the support available for businesses and workers. Further information is available at
gov.uk/coronavirus.
Going to work
You may travel for work purposes, but only where you cannot work from home.
Employers and employees should discuss their working arrangements, and employers should take every possible step to
facilitate their employees working from home.
Certain jobs require people to travel to their place of work.
If you cannot work from home then you can still travel to work, provided neither you nor any of your household have
coronavirus symptoms. This is consistent with advice from the Chief Medical Officer.
Further information on all these areas and more is available:
if you live in England go togov.uk/coronavirus
if you live in Scotland go togov.scot/coronavirus-covid-19
if you live in Wales go togov.wales/coronavirus
if you live in Northern Ireland go tonidirect.gov.uk/campaigns/coronavirus-covid-19
If you have difficulties communicating or hearing, you can call 18001 111 on a textphone or access the NHS 111
British Sign Language (BSL) interpreter service through www.nhs.uk/111.
Stay at home. Protect the NHS. Save lives.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
