INDIAN COUNCIT OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
DEPARTMENT OF HEATTH RESEARCH
Advisory on feasibility of using pooled samples for molecular testing of COvID-19
Background:N u m ber of COVID-19 cases in lndia is rising exponentially' ln view of this,
it is critical to increase the numbers of tests conducted by laboratories. Positivity rate
in cases is still low. Hence, it may help to use the pooled samples for screening. A
pooled testing algorithm involves the PCR screening of a specimen pool comprising
multiple individual patient specimens, followed by individual testing (pool de-
convolution) only if a pool screens positive. As all individual samples in a negative pool
are regarded as negative, it results in substantial cost savings when a large proportion
of pools tests negative.
objectives: To increase capacity of the laboratories to screen increased numbers of
samples using molecular testing for COVID-19 for the purpose of surveillance.
Methods &Results: A feasibility study was conducted at DHR/ICMR Virus Research &
Diagnostic Laboratory (VRDL) at King George's Medical University (KGMU), Lucknow. lt
has been demonstrated thatperforming real-time PCR for COVID-19 by pooling 5
samples of TS/NS (200 ul/sample) is feasible when the prevalence rates of infection are
low.All individual samples in a negative pool to be regarded as negative. Deconvoluted
testing is recommended if any of the pool is positive. Pooling of more than 5 samples is
not recommended to avoid the effect of dilution leading to false negatives.
Recommendations for sample pooling for real-time RT-PcR screening for covlD-19 are
as follows (based on the KGMU study):
1. Use only in areas with low prevalence of COVID-19 (initially using proxy of low
positivity of <2%o from the existing data. Still a watch should be kept on
increasing positivity in such areas
2. ln areas with positivity of 2-5o/o, sample pooling for PCR screening may be
considered only in community survey or surveillance among asymptomatic
individuals, strictly excluding pooling samples of individuals with known contact
with confirmed cases, Health Care Workers (in direct contact with care of
COVID-19 patients). Sample from such individuals should be directly tested
without pooling
3. Pooling of sample is not recommended in areas or population with positivity
rates of >5% for COVID-19
preferable number of samples to be pooled is five, though more than two samples
can be pooled, but considering higher possibility of missing positive samples with low
viral load, it strongly discouraged to pool more than 5 samples, except in research
mode.
,
