Publications approval reference: 001559
Specialty guides for patient management during the coronavirus pandemic
Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of
intrapartum maternity care during the
coronavirus pandemic
9 April Version 1
The COVID-19 pandemic has presented a significant challenge for the NHS: the provision of
high quality care for those experiencing serious symptoms of the virus needs to be balanced
with the safe delivery of core non-elective services, such as maternity, a service strongly
focused on safety and with very limited opportunities to reduce demand. This challenge will
inevitably mean that some clinical staff are deployed to areas of hospitals they do not usually
work in. At the same time, many midwives, obstetricians, anaesthetists and support staff are
in self-isolation, temporarily reducing the available maternity workforce, with varying and
sometimes significant impacts felt locally.
In such circumstances, it is right that NHS trusts, working together as part of local maternity
systems (LMS), consider how best to maintain intrapartum services through a phased
approach, to ensure that staff are deployed in the best way and women and babies continue
to experience safe care.
This document sets out how safe services should be maintained and how decisions about
reorganisation of services should be taken. The appendix provides a template for
communicating changes in the services to local women and their families.
It has been produced in consultation with the Royal College of Midwives (RCM), Royal
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG), the Royal College of Anaesthetists,
the Obstetric Anaesthetists Association and maternity service user representatives.
Separate guidance is available from RCOG and RCM on ante- and postnatal care and on
antenatal screening.
2 | Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of intrapartum maternity care during the coronavirus pandemic
Maintaining safe services
Maternity care, especially intrapartum care, is a core non-elective service that needs
adequate staffing and access to facilities. The principle must be to maintain the safety and
wellbeing of women and their babies. This means preventing avoidable perinatal mortality
and morbidity (including issues relating to mental health and wellbeing). At the same time,
services should aim to maximise choices for women within the constraints of the available
staffing and facilities. They should continue to provide a personalised risk assessment for all
women and agree with them a package of care.
Providing safe services also means balancing the response to COVID-19 with the continuing
need to manage obstetric risk. Some trusts report that they are redeploying their maternity
workforce, facilities and equipment (eg ventilators from obstetric theatres) to other parts of
the hospital to help with the COVID-19 response. The board level safety champion is well
positioned to work with the hospital’s senior management team and maternity services to
ensure an appropriate balance.
RCOG guidance provides staffing options for obstetrics and gynaecology services during the
COVID-19 pandemic. At the very least a maternity service must be able to respond to
emergencies; as a rough guide this means having a workforce similar to that generally seen
at weekends. An additional multidisciplinary team will be required during the day to ensure
the continued provision of elective caesarean sections. Trusts may consider seconding staff
from other areas of the hospital, such as gynaecologists, to maintain the maternity service,
with appropriate refresher training. In the event of critical staff shortages trusts’ major
incident teams should consider testing staff who are self-isolating, as well as relevant family
members, for COVID-19, to expedite their return to work.
Trusts should consider the availability of all the professions that impact on their ability to
provide a complete, safe maternity service:
• Midwives and maternity support workers are required to care for pregnant women
and their babies and should only be redeployed within maternity care.
• Obstetricians should not be redeployed beyond the point where doing so would put
the operation of an emergency service at risk, eg inability to maintain the
emergency caesarean section and operative vaginal delivery service. Access to
clinically indicated elective caesarean section also needs to be maintained to avoid
further increases in emergency work.
• NHS England and NHS Improvement guidance advises trusts to ensure that
services supported by anaesthetists that cannot decrease clinical activity (eg
emergency surgery, obstetrics) are safely staffed, Again, this means not beyond the
3 | Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of intrapartum maternity care during the coronavirus pandemic
point where doing so would put the operation of an emergency service at risk,
including inability to maintain an epidural service for women in labour.
• Neonatal services may be reorganised locally in line with the national neonatal
critical care surge guidance.
Many trusts have reported imposing restrictions on visitors. While it may be necessary to
restrict numbers for reasons of infection control, women should have access to one birth
partner during labour (from the point of admission to labour ward or birth centre) and birth in
line with World Health Organization advice. The birth partner will often be able to support
midwives in caring for the woman and her baby, as well as being important for the wellbeing
of the woman in labour. Birth partners must be asymptomatic; if they are not, the woman
must be asked to nominate another person.
Suspending services
Faced with a shortage of clinical staff, the safest option may be to consolidate care in fewer
places by closing specific services temporarily. Such decisions must be influenced by a risk
assessment and only made after considering:
• alternative options, such as deploying returning retirees and independent midwives
• a progressive approach, thereby keeping as many options available for as long as
possible – suspending certain options, particularly place of birth, will have a
significant impact on some women and should be avoided unless absolutely
necessary to ensure a safe service.
All the following conditions must be met before trusts suspend intrapartum care options:
• The available workforce must be either too small or of insufficient skill mix to ensure
the safety of women and their babies with services in their current configuration.
• Women must still be able to make decisions about the care they receive in line with
the principles of informed consent.
• The withdrawal of services must be temporary and must be clearly communicated to
women and their families.
• The extent of the withdrawal of options must be proportionate and tailored to the
specific workforce constraints.
• The withdrawal of options must be identified in an escalation plan, which has been
agreed by the board-level safety champion, cleared through the organisation’s
internal governance processes and notified to the NHS England and NHS
Improvement regional chief midwife and relevant regional director of nursing as
appropriate.
4 | Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of intrapartum maternity care during the coronavirus pandemic
• Other organisations within the LMS and maternity clinical network, including the local
ambulance service and the local neonatal operational delivery network, must have
been consulted on the escalation plan to ensure that the impact on them is
manageable and sufficient capacity remains available in the local area to meet
demand.
• The local Maternity Voices Partnership (MVP) service user chair, representing local
women and families, must have been involved in the decision-making process.
Escalation plans
Trusts must put together a maternity-specific escalation plan setting out the extent of the
current staff shortage and detailing the service changes to fill the gap, alongside any other
mitigations that have already been made, such as use of students and employing retirees
and independent midwives. Trusts that are not currently facing an acute staff shortage
should nevertheless now consider developing a stepped escalation plan which can be
enacted if numbers of available staff fall substantially.
Trusts must work together as LMS or more widely through maternity clinical networks to
ensure that decisions made in one place do not have a disproportionately negative impact on
another, and that services can be co-ordinated across a wider footprint, enabling better
management of capacity and demand.
Recovery plans are essential and should bear in mind the regional modelling of how the
virus is likely to spread and, as testing becomes more widely available, the return to work of
staff who have had COVID-19.
Place of birth choices in midwifery services
Alongside hospital midwifery units, freestanding midwifery units and home birth teams
provide a safe option for many women as set out in National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) guidance. A decision on whether to maintain, limit or withdraw these
services should not be taken lightly and will involve careful balancing of a number of
considerations:
• During the COVID-19 pandemic freestanding units and home births have the
advantage of helping to keep women out of hospital, reducing the pressure on
hospital services.1
Some trusts report increasing requests for home births from
pregnant women concerned about the potential risk of infection from giving birth in a
hospital or with fear of birth in a hospital environment.
1
NICE CG190 highlights that for low-risk multiparous women, planning birth at home or in a freestanding
midwifery unit is associated with a higher rate of spontaneous vaginal birth than planning birth in an alongside
midwifery unit or in an obstetric unit.
5 | Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of intrapartum maternity care during the coronavirus pandemic
• Midwifery units and home birth services tend to operate with a smaller pool of
midwifery staff. High staff absence in community midwifery services can reduce
staffing ratios to an unsustainable level if staff numbers cannot be supported through
deployment of student midwives, maternity support workers, and retired or non-
clinical midwives.
• A proportion of women need to transfer from home or a freestanding unit to the
obstetric unit. This usually requires a response from an ambulance service, which
may also currently be stretched. This means transfers from home to hospital may not
be sufficiently quick to ensure the safety of mother and baby.
Where a home birth service is in operation, trusts or LMS may need to develop a clear
standard operating procedure with their regional ambulance service. This could include local
alternative transport pathways for women where a timely response is likely to be delayed.
Women should always be given information that reflects locally agreed pathways for transfer
to enable informed decision-making.
If a trust decides to suspend a freestanding midwifery unit, home birth service or redeploy an
alongside midwifery unit (eg for use by women with COVID-19 symptoms) to guarantee
safety, it should consider maintaining at least one midwifery care option. Trusts may also
consider how they can offer the same style of care in the obstetric unit, perhaps by moving
equipment such as birthing pools. Work as a LMS may help to keep options open, either by
sharing staff or by making transfers of care available. Consideration may be given to limiting
rather than suspending some services: for example, to low risk women who have had a baby
before and are at much lower risk of requiring intrapartum transfer than primiparous women.2
Understanding the impacts and potential risks relating to women’s mental health and
wellbeing during this period is vital, and a personalised care approach can support this. This
needs to cover a range of issues, including:
• acknowledging the pandemic is likely to increase anxiety among pregnant women,
given it brings further uncertainty
• understanding the impact of changes in service provision and therefore birthing
choices for women with a history of birth trauma, tokophobia, etc and the risks to
their mental health; as well as the risks to women without such a history
• the importance of robust plans for women identified as at risk of, or experiencing,
complex/severe mental health problems in the intrapartum period and beyond. The
‘red flags’ identified through MBRRACE reports need to be understood and
addressed, to ensure that women experiencing mental ill health at this time can still
2
Birthplace study, transfer rate 2% versus 40%.
6 | Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of intrapartum maternity care during the coronavirus pandemic
access specialised mental health care if required. Maternal mental illness remains
one of the leading causes of maternal death.
Trusts should also consider how they will respond to more women choosing to stay at home
as long as possible and subsequently experiencing an unplanned home birth (babies ‘born
before arrival’) during this time.
Suspending obstetric units
Occasionally busy obstetric services close temporarily to manage demand. Such a decision
must be taken in line with existing processes, in conjunction with other trusts in an LMS or
maternity clinical network, as they are likely to be experiencing similar pressures.
In the most challenging circumstances it may be better for hospitals with a particularly high
demand for intensive care due to COVID-19 infections, working in conjunction with their
LMS, to temporarily close a maternity unit and move care to another nearby hospital. This
potentially allows:
• redeployment of some clinical staff within the hospital (such as anaesthetists and
junior medical staff)
• other key maternity workers to move to support a nearby unit
• a better standard of maternity care for women and their babies at the nearby unit.
An alternative might be to support the stretched unit by redeploying staff temporarily from
elsewhere.
If temporary closure is required, the staff should be redeployed to support other local trusts.
NHS England and NHS Improvement have produced an enabling staff movement toolkit to
help with this.
It is more important than ever that women who are expected to give birth at less than 27
weeks’ gestation can do so in a maternity unit with appropriate on-site neonatal care, to
avoid unnecessary transfers of care, although neonatal services may be reorganised locally
in line with the national neonatal critical care surge guidance.
Many trusts have established pathways for women with specific needs. As these address
specific risks, including safeguarding, trusts will need to consider how to manage these risks
as service models change.
Suspending access to certain interventions
A shortage of obstetricians or anaesthetists may mean there is insufficient capacity to meet
demand. In extreme circumstances, there may no option other than to temporarily suspend
7 | Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of intrapartum maternity care during the coronavirus pandemic
access to elective procedures. Trusts should make every effort to avoid this situation and, in
particular, should work as a LMS or maternity clinical network to keep options open, either by
pooling staff or by making transfers of care available to women.
Women who are being induced can require long periods of admission and have higher levels
of subsequent interventions during labour. Indications for induction of labour may need to be
reviewed and limited to women who have a clear clinical indication. It may be possible to
improve outpatient provision of induction of labour, depending on the availability of transport
to hospital, in line with RCOG/RCM guidance.3
Engaging with service users and their families
Trusts or LMS must work with their MVP service user chair to develop their plans. This does
not need to be a long process – one of the benefits of standing MVPs is the ability to
mobilise input quickly. They will understand the pressures services are currently under and
may be able to suggest improvements to proposals that make relatively little operational
difference but have a big impact on service user experience or outcomes. Where decisions
have already been made, the MVP must be involved in regular reviews.
Trusts or LMS must communicate temporary changes to service provision clearly and
transparently, including on a public-facing website, so that women can make informed
decisions about the care they receive. There is considerable public understanding about the
pressures the NHS is currently under, but the link between COVID-19 and maternity service
capacity may not be well understood by all. At the same time, women are understandably
concerned about the risk of transmission of the virus and the possible restrictions around
birth on them and their baby. The appendix gives an example statement. Local
communications should be co-produced with the local MVP service user chair.
Trusts should consider establishing telephone or video call helplines for women with
concerns or requiring advice about accessing the services they need (as already exist in
Hampshire and Surrey Heartlands and as established in Cornwall and Stockport in response
to COVID-19, for example). This may also help with demand management. Midwives who
are self-isolating may be able to staff these helplines.
3
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection in Pregnancy: Information for healthcare professionals (version 5), section
3.4.
8 | Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of intrapartum maternity care during the coronavirus pandemic
Appendix: Communicating with women and their families
Please co-produce all communications to women and their families with your MVP service
user chair to ensure the language is easy to understand and that you have covered all the
keys points. You can use this template as a basis and adapt it as appropriate to your local
circumstances.
It is helpful to communicate with local women and families now and as your service may
change over the coming days. Communicating in a number of different ways, for example
using written text and by making a short, informal film can be beneficial. Please refer to the
guidance from the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists for co-produced, up-
to-date information for women and their families.
Template statement
We want to make sure you and your baby are well during the coronavirus pandemic and we
are committed to providing safe and personal maternity care. It is important that you have all
the information you need to help you to make informed decisions about your maternity care.
We might have fewer maternity staff available. This means we have had to think about how
we will care for you and your family during your labour and birth.
Women who have coronavirus or coronavirus symptoms will be cared for in a separate part
of the maternity unit to women who do not have symptoms. This is to keep everybody who
uses our services as safe as possible.
We have already… [detail what you have done to mitigate against low staffing levels, such
as bringing independent midwives into the team, etc].
However, we have had to make some changes to ensure we keep you and your baby safe.
These are … [add in the temporary changes you have made]. These changes have been
made with our Maternity Voices Partnership (MVP) user chair. You can find out about the
MVP’s role here [add hyperlink to webpage/social media page].
These choices of place of birth that are still be available are [delete as necessary]:
• homebirth
• alongside midwifery-led unit
• freestanding midwifery-led unit
• obstetric unit.
You will still be treated with respect and dignity.
9 | Clinical guide for the temporary reorganisation of intrapartum maternity care during the coronavirus pandemic
You will still be able to have a birth partner of your choice during your labour and birth, as
long as they do not have symptoms of coronavirus.
You can still expect us to communicate clearly with you.
You will still be able to have access to pain relief options, including gas and air and an
epidural.
You will still be able to be mobile, use a birthing ball and birth in a position of your choice.
Your midwife or obstetrician will support you at this time as you plan for your labour and
birth. This might include changing your plan for your birth or transferring your care to a
different maternity service. Your midwife or obstetrician can help you with this.
In the meantime, if you have any questions please contact [midwife, COVID-19 helpline,
etc.].
