Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Storing or treating COVID-19 cleansing waste at a
healthcare waste management facility: RPS
Published 27 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Storing or treating COVID-19 cleansing waste at a healthcare waste management facility: RPS
This COVID-19 regulatory position statement (RPS) only applies to waste from cleaning people or places infected or
potentially infected with COVID-19.
Contents
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
Conditions you must comply with
Enforcement
When to check back
Contact the Environment Agency
If you have a permit to store healthcare waste coded 18 01 03* and you comply with the conditions in this COVID-19RPS,
you can store waste coded 15 02 02* with HP9 infectious properties.
If you have a permit to treat healthcare waste coded 18 01 03* and you comply with the conditions in this COVID-19
RPS,
you can treat waste coded 15 02 02* with HP9 infectious properties.
In both cases you do not need waste code 15 02 02* listed on your permit if the waste is infected or potentially infected
with COVID-19.
You will not need to carry out a healthcare waste pre-acceptance audit for waste coded 15 02 02*.
This COVID-19 RPS does not apply to any other activity, even if it is under the same legislation. You may still need other
permits or licences for other activities you carry out.
When this COVID-19 RPS applies
This COVID-19 RPS only applies to:
facilities that are permitted to store or treat waste coded 18 01 03*
waste coded 15 02 02* that is from cleaning people or places infected or potentially infected with COVID-19
Conditions you must comply with
You must comply with all the other requirements of your permit.
When storing and treating waste coded 15 02 02* you must comply with the requirements on your permit for storing and
treating waste coded 18 01 03*.
If you are storing or treating any waste coded 15 02 02* you must include it in your assessment when assessing:
compliance with any specific permit storage and treatment limits for waste code 18 01 03*
compliance with any permit limits on total waste stored or treated under your permit
You must make sure your activities do not endanger human health or the environment. You must not:
cause a risk to water, air, soil, plants or animals
cause a nuisance through noise or odours
adversely affect the countryside or places of special interest
Enforcement
A COVID-19 RPS means that the Environment Agency will not normally take enforcement action against you provided:
your activity meets the description set out in this COVID-19RPS
you comply with the conditions set out in this COVID-19RPS
your activity does not, and is not likely to, cause environmental pollution or harm human health
When to check back
This COVID-19 RPS will be withdrawn on 30 June 2020. After this date you must have a permit authorising the activity or
have removed all waste coded 15 02 02* from the site.
Contact the Environment Agency
General enquiries
National Customer Contact Centre
PO Box 544
Rotherham
S60 1BY
Email
enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk
Telephone
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
03708 506 506
Telephone from outside the UK (Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm GMT)
+44 (0) 114 282 5312
Monday to Friday, 8am to 6pm.
Due to the impact of COVID-19 on our teams you may experience some delays in responses as most of our staff will be working from
home. The best way to contact us is by email (enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk) rather than the postal address.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
