Immunization Message Submissions for Meaningful Use
Puerto Rico Immunization Registry (PRIR) is used to record all immunizations for residents of Puerto
Rico. PRIR is a free, computerized internet database application, developed to record and track
immunization dates of Puerto Rico's children and adults; providing assistance for keeping everyone on
track for their recommended immunizations. Currently, PRIR receives data from hospital systems, vital
records offices, local health departments, private providers, Medicaid, and schools.
During December 2008 through July 2009, the Secretary of Health approved four (4) Administrative
Orders to increase the data entered to the registry and these are:
• All providers who administered vaccines from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico are
obligated to enter all data from these administered vaccines into the IIS.
• All Healthcare Facilities of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico are obligated to administer the
flu vaccine to all their personnel and enter this information to the IIS.
• All Health Insurance Plan (public or private) are obligated to provide the H1N1 vaccine to all
high risk clients and report the information to the IIS.
• All Healthcare Organizations (public or private) are obligated to provide the flu vaccine to all
high risk groups (pregnant women, children between the ages of 6 months to 18 years old,
adults who are 50 years old or older, and anyone who is 6 months old or older with a
chronic disease, etc.) and enter this information into the IIS.
The Puerto Rico Immunization Program is encouraging providers and hospitals to send immunization
data to meet their Meaningful Use (MU) obligation.
Meaningful Use
PRIR accepts immunization data in the HL7 2.5.1 message formats for Stage 1 and 2. To meet
Meaningful Use, submission of immunization information will need to be sent from a Certified EHR
Technology (CEHRT), in the correct HL7 format, and conform to PRIR technical specifications.
PRIR Data Exchange Process
PRIR has developed a testing process to support eligible Providers (EPs) and eligible hospitals (EHs) in
meeting the immunization Meaningful Use measure.
PRIR will accept Meaningful Use tests submitted using PRIR secure web site (https). The test files must
include minimum ten (10) records of production data. If the message content contains errors then the
test fails and the provider can review the response file and summit the file again. If the test succeeds,
the provider is encouraged to implement regular reporting of immunization information to PRIR.
For ongoing immunization data submission to PRIR, batch data submissions are supported as one-way
data transmissions.
How to initiate Meaningful Use test process
• Healthcare providers or EHR vendors should contact the PRIR Program Analyst, Norma
Castro (787) 765-2929 ext. 3329 or PRIR Data Manager Verónica Rodríguez (787) 765-2929
ext. 3326, to initiate the data exchange process.
• PRIR staff will discuss PRIR specifications, required fields, transport options, and testing
protocol via conference call.
• Test files will need to be created by vendor/healthcare entity and provided to PRIR staff.
Layout and data will be checked to determine if appropriate with feedback provided as
necessary.
• Once layout and data are deemed to be appropriate, access to the PRIR server will be
granted to appropriate provider/vendor personnel along with the web address and the key
for data transport.
• Typically (2) weeks to (1) month is required for testing.
• Once the healthcare provider/vendor is ready to go live, the account will be changed to
production. For the first 60 days, all data goes through a pre-processor to ensure data
integrity and any issues seen are relayed back to the healthcare provider.
• After 60 days, the need for preprocessing is removed and the interface is deemed live.
Guides and Specifications
The Final Rule for Health Information Technology (July, 2010) identified HL7 2.5.1 and HL7 2.3.1 as data
exchange standards for submission to immunization registries and HL7 Standard Code Set CVX –
Vaccines Administered as the vocabulary standard for submission to immunization registries. While both
HL7 2.5.1, HL-7 2.4 and HL7 2.3.1 are supported by PRIR, HL7 2.5.1 is recommended. Relevant links to
the standards follow:
• Immunization Information Systems (IIS) standards Health Level Seven (HL7)
(http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/iis/func-stds.html)
• HL7 Version 2.5.1 Implementation guide for immunization messaging, Release 1.5
(11/5/2014) (http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/programs/iis/technical-guidance/hl7.html)
• HL7 Standard code set CVX - Vaccines administered
(http://www2a.cdc.gov/vaccines/IIS/IISStandards/vaccines.asp?rpt=cvx)
• PRIR web site (https://prir.salud.gov.pr/)
EHR Vendor Connected to PRIR
 Surescripts
 STC
 Costco
