BANK OF ENGLAND Andrew Bailey
Governor
The Rt Hon Rishi Sunak MP
Chancellor of the Exchequer
HM Treasury
1 Horse Guards Road
London
SW1A2HQ
We have been discussing how the Bank and HM Treasury can work together to further help UK
businesses and households manage through an economic shock that could be sharp and large, but
should be temporary. On 11 March 2020, the Bank and HMT announced a range of measures, to help UK
businesses and households to bridge across the economic disruption that is likely to be associated with
Covid-19.
Over the past week, we have agreed that we need to go further. Although the magnitude of the economic
shock from Covid-19 is highly uncertain, activity is likely to weaken materially in the United Kingdom over
the coming months. Temporary, but significant, disruptions to supply chains and weaker activity will
challenge cash flows and increase demand for credit from companies.
The new Covid-19 Corporate Financing Facility (CCFF) will provide funding to businesses by purchasing
commercial paper of up to one-year maturity, issued by firms making a material contribution to the UK
economy. It will help businesses across a wide range of sectors to bridge across the economic disruption
that is iikely to be associated with Covid-19, supporting them in paying salaries, rents and suppliers, even
while experiencing severe disruption to cashflows.
The Bank wil! implement the facility on behalf of the Treasury and wili put it into place as soon as
possible. We will be publishing a market notice with the details of the facility tomorrow.
Commercial paper eligible for the scheme will be issued by non-financiai companies that make a material
contribution to the UK economy and that had, prior to being affected by Covid-19, a short or long- term
rating of investment grade, or financial health equivalent to an investment grade rating.
By providing an alternative source of finance for these companies, the scheme will help to retain the
capacity of the banking system to lend to a much broader range of companies, including small and
medium sized enterprises. That capacity was boosted last week by the Bank of England's package of
measures to reduce the UK countercyclical capital buffer and launch a new Term Funding Scheme with
additional incentives for lending to SMEs.
As this is HM Treasury's facility, with the Bank providing agency services to HM Treasury under an
agency agreement, HM Treasury wiil fully indemnify the Bank from any losses and expenses arising from
it. HM Treasury will also make the final decision regarding the eligibility of any business for the Facility
and will be responsible for the risk management framework of the Facility.
17 March 2020
Bank of England, Threadneedle Street, London EC2R SAH T +44 (0)20 34614444 www.bankofengland.co.uk
2
The CCFF will be set up in an entity separate from the Bank, it will be funded by the issuance of
additional central bank reserves. The Monetary Policy Committee welcomes the new Facility. The
Committee wili continue to decide on the overall amount of asset purchases that are financed by central
bank reserves. It will therefore take the size of the CCFF into account when it takes its decisions on the
target stock of government and corporate bonds financed by reserves.
Officials at HM Treasury and the Bank have worked closeiy in developing the CCFF and will continue to
work closely as it is implemented. This will include keeping under review the need for further extensions
to ensure it continues to fulfil its purpose to help UK businesses bridge across the economic disruption
that is likely to be associated with Covid-19.
