HIGHLIGHTS
• Today, 17 February 2020, the Ministry of Public Health of Thailand
announced a new laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 novel coronavirus
case, the 35th
confirmed case in the country so far.
• The case reported today is a 60-year-old woman from China who is part
of a family cluster whose other confirmed cases were reported earlier.
• The Ministry of Public Health also reports that 145 persons are currently
under investigation.
• The Ministry has added to its definition of a Person Under Investigation
(PUI) for COVID-19 infection, by including anybody who presents with
fever and symptoms and with travel history to Japan and Singapore (in
addition to mainland China, Hong Kong SAR, Macau SAR and Taipei and environs) within 14 days prior to
the onset of illness.
• Health authorities reiterate that the Government continues to plan for the possibility that human-to-human
transmission may escalate in the weeks and months ahead, bringing an increase in the number of cases
from more areas of the country.
• To that end, consultations are being held by the Government, bringing together central and local health
authorities and private institutions, to ensure contingency planning is strengthened and all key stakeholders
are coordinated.
• Authorities are registering commercial test kits for COVID-19, to ensure that at least one key hospital per
province across Thailand initially has the kits necessary to carry out testing of suspected cases.
• WHO reiterates that health screening and surveillance systems in Thailand – at points of entry into the
country as well as nationwide - are robust and capable of tracking suspected cases quickly, allowing health
authorities to implement protocols to ensure isolation, contact tracing, testing and treatment of symptoms.
• 138 Thai nationals remain under a 14-day quarantine at Navy guesthouses after having been brought back
to their country from Wuhan, China on 4 February. This quarantine period expires this week. A man among
this group who tested positive for COVID-19 after displaying flu-like symptoms on 7 February is said to be
doing well.
RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
The basic principles to reduce the general risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections, including by the
virus causing COVID-19, include the following:
• Avoiding close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections.
• Frequent hand-washing, especially after direct contact with ill people or their environment.
• Avoiding unprotected contact with farm or wild animals.
• People with symptoms of acute respiratory infection should practice cough etiquette (maintain distance, cover
coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clothing, and wash hands).
• Within healthcare facilities, enhance standard infection prevention and control practices in hospitals, especially
in emergency departments.
WHO does not recommend any specific health measures for travellers. In case of symptoms suggestive of
respiratory illness either during or after travel, travellers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share
their travel history with their healthcare provider.
MEDIA
• Media coverage of the outbreak continues to be high in Thailand, including news of the outbreak from China
and other countries.
• WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak, and has revamped its website to
provide relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies. Media queries can be
directed to sethawebmaster@who.int or kanpirom@who.int
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 17 February 2020
THAILAND SITUATION
IN NUMBERS
total and new cases in
last 24 hours
35 confirmed (1 new case)
145 persons currently under
investigation
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 17 February 2020
• WHO Thailand’s Twitter and Facebook accounts post useful information on hygiene and protection, such
as when and how to use masks, as well as relevant WHO technical guidelines and other content related to
the novel coronavirus situation in Thailand and globally.
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
WHO Thailand’s strategic objectives to support Thailand’s response are to:
• Limit human-to-human transmission including reducing secondary infections among close contacts and
health care workers, preventing transmission amplification events, and preventing further spread within as
well as to and from Thailand i
;
• Identify, isolate and care for patients early, including providing optimized care for infected patients;
• Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission and infection, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines;
• Communicate critical risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation;
• Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships.
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
• Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.
• Thailand also recently updated its dedicated national pandemic influenza preparedness plan (currently
pending approval by the Prime Minister’s Cabinet).
• With WHO support, the National Institute of Health of Thailand is supporting specimen testing for other
countries as requested; this support is currently being provided to Myanmar. Support for Indonesia is also
being arranged. Support for the Maldives is also under discussion with AFRIMS, Thailand (Armed Force
Research Institute of Medical Sciences)
• A special advisory group consisting of former high-level health officials has been formed to support the
Health Ministry in its response to the outbreak.
• The Health Ministry is conducting modelling exercises with the National Research Council of Thailand to
forecast possible scenarios and outcomes as the outbreak evolves in Thailand.
• Visitors to Thailand who have recently been in Wuhan, China, and other affected areas are being provided
information upon arrival by the Ministry of Public Health, including how to report any possible illness to the
Department of Disease Control using the 1422 hotline from anywhere in Thailand.
• The Ministry has also introduced a self-reporting online tool, available in Thai, English and Chinese, which
can be accessed here.
What WHO is doing in Thailand
• WHO Thailand has been in regular and direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry
of Public Health;
• WHO shares information with the Government including key developments elsewhere, as well as guidelines
and updates;
• WHO facilitates the external sharing of the virus between researchers to contribute to regional and global
efforts to develop a vaccine and strengthen efforts to combat the outbreak;
• WHO will also be helping facilitate research collaboration between Thai researchers and those from other
parts of WHO’s global research network;
• WHO facilitates support from the WHO collaborating centre in Hong Kong for infectious disease modelling
as required;
• WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand;
• WHO is collaborating with UNICEF on supporting the Ministry of Public Health and Ministry of Education in
relation to special measures in schools and other educational institutions to safeguard against the spread
of 2019-nCoV.
What WHO is doing globally
• WHO has developed a protocol for the investigation of early cases (the “First Few X (FFX) Cases and
contact investigation protocol for 2019-novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infection”). The protocol is designed
to gain an early understanding of the key clinical, epidemiological and virological characteristics of the first
cases of 2019-nCoV infection detected in any individual country, to inform the development and updating of
public health guidance to manage cases and reduce potential spread and impact of infection.
• WHO has developed interim global guidance for laboratory diagnosis, advice on the use of masks during
home care and in health care settings in the context of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak, clinical
management, infection prevention and control in health care settings, home care for patients with suspected
novel coronavirus, risk communication and community engagement and Global Surveillance for human
infection with novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV).
• WHO has prepared a disease commodity package that includes an essential list of biomedical equipment,
medicines and supplies necessary to care for patients with 2019-nCoV.
• WHO has provided recommendations to reduce risk of transmission from animals to humans.
• WHO has published updated advice for international traffic in relation to the outbreak of the novel
coronavirus 2019-nCoV.
• WHO has activated an R&D blueprint to accelerate diagnostics, vaccines, and therapeutics.
• WHO has developed an online course to provide general introduction to emerging respiratory viruses,
including novel coronaviruses.
• WHO is providing guidance on early investigations, which are critical to carry out early in an outbreak of a
new virus. The data collected from the protocols can be used to refine recommendations for surveillance
and case definitions, to characterize the key epidemiological transmission features of 2019-nCoV, help
understand spread, severity, spectrum of disease, impact on the community and to inform operational
models for implementation of countermeasures such as case isolation, contact tracing and isolation. Several
protocols are available here.
• WHO is working with its networks of researchers and other experts to coordinate global work on surveillance,
epidemiology, modelling, diagnostics, clinical care and treatment, and other ways to identify, manage the
disease and limit onward transmission. WHO has issued interim guidance for countries, which is updated
regularly.
• The WHO R&D Blueprint is a global strategy and preparedness plan that allows the rapid activation of R&D
activities during epidemics. On 11-12 February, WHO convened a global research and innovation forum in
Geneva to mobilize international action and enable identification of key knowledge gaps and research
priorities to contribute to the control of COVID-19. The forum included members of the scientific community,
researchers from Member States’ public health agencies including from Thailand, regulatory experts and
major funders of research related to COVID-19. During the meeting, the more than 300 participants agreed
on a set of global research priorities and outlined mechanisms for continuing scientific interactions and
collaborations beyond the meeting, to be coordinated and facilitated by WHO. They consulted with research
funders to determine how necessary resources can be mobilized so that critical research can start
immediately. The resulting roadmap will be used by researchers and funders to accelerate the research
response.
USEFUL LINKS
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, access the WHO Thailand website:
www.who.int/thailand
• For the latest worldwide figures and technical advice about the outbreak, including how to protect yourself,
access WHO Headquarters’ website: www.who.int including daily global situation reports:
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports/
• The International Health Regulations (IHR) can be viewed here.
• For the latest on the Thai government response, access the Department of Disease Control, Thai
Ministry of Public Health 2019-nCoV landing page. *
English: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/eng/index.php
Thai: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/index.php
Chinese: https://ddc.moph.go.th/viralpneumonia/chn/index.php
The Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422 (dialed from within Thailand).
The Thai Communicable Diseases Act (revised in 2015) is available here.
• For a comprehensive 2019-nCoV global case-tracker, via data visualisation including maps and charts,
access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE):
https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ec
f6 (English)
https://mophgis.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/210413ebb5ff49bb8914808af6473322
(Thai)
• Global research on novel coronavirus COVID-19 – (no need to login, list of articles is immediately available)
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/global-research-on-novel-coronavirus-
2019-ncov
• CABI - Global Health – Free access to CABI’s Coronavirus information collection for 3 months using a
voucher. To access, go to site; go to ‘login’ or 'account' at the top right of the page and follow the instructions to
'redeem a voucher'. The voucher code is CV4Y85D5JG9. https://www.cabdirect.org/globalhealth
• The Global Health Network - Coronavirus Outbreak Knowledge Hub - a ‘pop-up’ area on The Global
Health Network in response to requests for a knowledge hub and access to guidance on COVID-
19: https://coronavirus.tghn.org/
(Note: WHO does not take responsibility for content on external websites.)
For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the 2019-nCoV outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
i
This can be achieved through a combination of public health measures, such as rapid identification, diagnosis and management of
the cases, identification and follow up of the contacts, infection prevention and control in healthcare settings, implementation of health
measures for travellers, awareness-raising in the population and risk communication
