Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Exceeding waste storage limits at permitted sites
because of COVID-19: RPS C2
Published 6 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Exceeding waste storage limits at permitted sites because of COVID-19: RPS C2
You must usually comply with the waste storage limits in your environmental permit. However, this COVID-19 regulatory
position statement (RPS) allows you to temporarily exceed those limits if you cannot remove waste from your site because
Contents
1. When this COVID-19 RPS applies
2. Conditions you must comply with
3. Enforcement
4. When to check back
5. Contact the Environment Agency
of COVID-19 restrictions.
You must notify the Environment Agency by email before using this COVID-19RPS.
1. When this COVID-19 RPS applies
This COVID-19 RPS only applies:
if you can demonstrate that you need to temporarily store more waste than your permit allows because of COVID-19
restrictions
to wastes you are authorised to store under your permit
This COVID-19 RPS does not apply to any other activity, even if it is under the same legislation. You may still need other
permits or licences for other activities you carry out.
You must be able to demonstrate that you have taken all reasonable steps to comply with your permit. Reasonable steps
include:
contingency planning to avoid or minimise disruption to your business because of COVID-19
COVID-19 response planning to minimise the impact and duration of not being able to comply with your permit or
licence
minimising how far you exceed your waste storage limits
2. Conditions you must comply with
You must:
comply with all the other requirements on your permit
stop accepting waste at your site if there is a risk to human health or the environment
have written agreement from the landowner before you increase the amount of waste you store, if you are not the
landowner
notify the Environment Agency in writing, in advance of the types and quantities of waste you want to store over your
permitted limits
store all waste within the permitted site boundary
keep all storage areas secure to prevent unauthorised access
manage the waste you receive on site on a strict rotation basis so waste received on the site first is removed from the
site first and that you separate waste of different storage age
make sure all waste above the limits in your permit is removed from site within 3 months unless we have agreed
otherwise in writing – and in all cases by the expiry date on this COVID-19 RPS
do a written review of the risks of storing additional waste and how it will affect any plans, for example your
management system and fire prevention plan
make a record of any changes you make to your plans and comply with them – you must make the record of change
available to all your staff and to the Environment Agency on request
keep records to show that you have complied with the conditions in this COVID-19RPS for 24 months – these must be
available to the Environment Agency on request
You must not:
store a type of waste that is not on your permit
store waste for more than 3 months unless we have agreed this in writing
You must make sure that temporarily increasing the amount of waste you store does not endanger human health or the
environment. You must not:
cause a risk to water, air, soil, plants or animals
cause a nuisance through noise or odours
adversely affect the countryside or places of special interest
Places of Special Interest include but are not limited to:
European sites (Special Areas of Conservation and Special Protection Areas)
Ramsar sites
Sites of Special Scientific Interest
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
national and local nature reserves
Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Marine Conservation Zones
National Parks
If you operate under this COVID-19 RPS but think you may no longer be able to comply with its conditions, you musttell
the Environment Agency immediately.
3. Enforcement
A COVID-19 RPS means that the Environment Agency will not normally take enforcement action against you provided:
your activity meets the description set out in this COVID-19RPS
you comply with the conditions set out in this COVID-19RPS
your activity does not, and is not likely to, cause environmental pollution or harm human health
you have taken all reasonable steps to comply with your permit
4. When to check back
This COVID-19 RPS will be withdrawn on 30 September 2020 unless we extend it. After this date you must comply with
your permit.
5. Contact the Environment Agency
You must notify the Environment Agency by email before using this COVID-19RPS.
Put this wording in the title of your email: Waste COVID-19RPS C2 – ‘For information’.
If you need us to respond to a query please add ‘For action’ at the end of the wording in the title of your email.
Email: enquiries@environment-agency.gov.uk
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
