General considerations to keep in mind ...
Maintain the greatest possible distance when coughing or
sneezing – it is best to turn away.
Sneeze into the crook of your arm, or into a tissue which you
then dispose of.
Avoid touching when greeting other people and wash your hands
regularly and thoroughly with soap and water for at least 20
seconds.
Good hand hygiene is important ...
upon arrival at an educational institution
such as daycare centres or schools;
after breaks and sports activities;
after blowing your nose, sneezing or coughing;
before preparing food, before eating, and
after using the toilet.
Übersetzung in englischer Sprache durch das KI Kreis Soest
FOR ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS
INSTRUCTIONS REGARDING THE NOVEL
CORONAVIRUS (SARS-COV-2) AND COVID-19
How dangerous is the novel coronavirus?
Infection with the new coronavirus can lead to symptoms such as cough, runny nose, sore throat and fever, sometimes also diarrhoea.
After infection, symptoms of the disease can appear up to 14 days later.
The infection is not life-threatening for most people, including children. In some of those affected, the virus can lead to a more severe development
that includes breathing problems and pneumonia. So far, deaths have mainly occurred in patients who were older and/or who had previously
suffered from chronic underlying diseases. Not enough data is available to conclusively assess the severity of the new respiratory disease.
No vaccine is currently available to protect against the novel coronavirus.
How is the novel coronavirus transmitted?
The novel coronavirus is transmitted from person to person. The main route of transmission is droplet infection. This can occur directly via the
mucous membranes of the respiratory tract or indirectly via hands, which then come into contact with the oral or nasal mucosa and the
conjunctiva.
How can I avoid transmission of the coronavirus?
Keep your hands away from your
face, and avoid touching your
mouth, eyes or nose.
Do not share objects with other
people that you have contacted
with your mouth, such as cups or
bottles.
Do not share with other people
objects such as dishes, towels or
working materials such as pens.
What should I do in the event of illness symptoms?
The initial symptoms of an infection with the new coronavirus are cough, runny nose, sore throat and fever. Some of those affected will also suffer from
diarrhoea. If employees of the educational institution or children and adolescents who have been in an area in which the novel coronavirus has already
developed exhibit the symptoms described above within 14 days, they should avoid unnecessary contact with other people and if possible remain at
home. Those affected should contact their general practitioner by phone and discuss how to proceed before going to the doctor. If you come into
contact with a person with such a disease, those affected should contact their responsible health authority. The responsible health authority can be
found in a database of the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) at https://tools.rki.de/PLZTool/.
You can find this and other information at www.infektionsschutz.de. You can also access the media of the Federal
Centre for Health Education (BZgA), e.g. the "Correct Handwashing" sticker and the "10 Hygiene Tips" poster, available for
download free of charge at http://www.infektionsschutz.de/medien/plakat-10-hygienetipps
Status:
28
Feb
2020
Further information on protection against infectious diseases and the current FAQ on
respiratory infections caused by the novel coronavirus
can be found on the website of the Federal Centre for Health Education:
www.infektionsschutz.de
