INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH
Stratcqv of COVID19 testinq in tndia fi7l03/2O2Ol:
Backqround:
WHO declared an outbreak of febrile respiratory illness of unknown etiology in December 2019
from Wuhan, Hubei province of China. Since its emergence, the disease his rapidly spread to
neighboring provinces of China as well .15.1
other countries mainly through lnternational travel.
lnfection is spread through droplets of an infected patient generat;d by coughing and sneezing
or through prolonged contact with infected patients.
Currently, lndia has witnessed only imported cases of COV|Dlg and limited local transmission
from imported cases to their immediate contacts. Community transmission of the disease has
not been documented till now. lf community transmission is documented, the above testing
strategy will undergo changes to evolve into stage appropriate testing strategy.
Obiectives:
. To contain the spread of infection / community transmission of COV|DI9 by improving
access.
. To provide free of cost and reliable diagnosis to all individuals meeting the inclusion
criteria ot COVlDl9 testing.
. To avoid indiscriminate testing and reducing panic and optimally utjlize the resources of
the country and scale up facilities for testing.
Current scenario:
. All individuals requiring to be tested are being offered at no cost.
. Accessibility and availability of the test is being increased every day by adding optimum
numbers of testing laboratories every week.
. Currently, the cost of the first step screening assay is INR 1SOO and additional
confirmatory assays is INR 3000.
. 4_"-"!9n of the laboratory expansion process, ICMR has engaged with non-ICMR /
MOHFW Govt. taboratories to initiate testing facilities. Tnis jncludei CSIR, DBT, DRDO,
Govt. Medical Colleges etc.
. ICMR is also engaging with high-quality private taboratories that includes NABL
accredited labs to understand the modalities of increasing access to the test while
ensuring appropriate safeguards.
. ICMR is operationalizing already existing high throughput diagnostic systems (upto 14OO
samples per day) to exponentia y augment the teiting capicity in heavily overloaded
states. lt is proposed to install. high throughput systJms in aiteast 5 lo;ations (with
possibility of scale-up to 10 locations) on an urgent basis.
. ICMR-NIV, pune..has atready ptaced orders to augment the existing stockpile of
reagents to 1 mi ion tests which would be available soon. WHO hls also been
requested to provide additionat 1 million probes for testing.
. l:::99^P, teshng are being reviewed and updated periodicafly tOgtO3t2O2O and
totuJt.zuzo) the testing strategy is reviewed by a high_level Expert Committee
constituted by Secretarv DHR & DG, lclrR and itaireO"Oy irof, nandeep Guleria,
Director, All tndia lnstitute of l\redrcat Sciences. bJnl
Current testinq strateov:
All asymptomatic people who have undertaken lnternational travel:
They should stay in home quarantine fo|l4 days.
- They should be tested only ii they become symptomatic (fever,
breathing etc.).
lf test result is positive, then they should be isolated and treated
protocol.
ii. All contacts of laboratory confirmed positive cases:
They should stay in home quarantine fo|l4 days.
- They should be tested only if they become symptomatic (fever,
breathing etc.).
- lf test result is positive, then they shoutd be isolated and treated
protocol.
iii. Health care workers managing respiratory distress / Severe
lllness should be tested when they are symptomatic.
cough, difficulty in
as per the standard
cough, difficulty in
as per the standard
Acute Respiratory
Guidelines for private sector laborato es intending to initiate COV|Dl g testing:
- Laboratory test should be only offered when prescribed by a qualified physician as per
ICIIR guidance for testing. Since the guidance evolves periodica y, the latest revised
version should be followed.
' ICMR will share the SOPS for taboratory testing and provjde positive controls for
establishing the test as soon as the concerned private laboratory has procured the
primers, probes and reagents as per SOps. Adoption of commercial kits for testing
should be based on validations conducted by lClilR-National lnstitute of Virology (NlV):
Pune.
- Appropriale biosafety and biosecurity precautions should be ensured while collectang
samples from a suspect patient. Alternatively, a disease specific separate collection site
may be created.
- All the private testing laboratories ensure immediate/ real-time reporting to the State
officiats of tOSp (tntegrated Disease Surveiflance program of Covii oi tnoialanO lCtUn
Hq. for timely inatiation of contact tracing and research ictivities.
- -'- -'
- lclrR skongry appears that private raboratories shourd offer covrDlg diagnosis at no
cost.
