1
Guidelines for
Quarantine
facilities COVID-19
The purpose of this document is to provide interim guidance for
setting up of quarantine facilities
2
Guidelines for Quarantine facilities
Topic Contents
Page No.
Introduction 3
Evaluation of Potential Sites 4
Risk assessment of the quarantine facility 5
Securing Entry and Exit points 6
Human resource Deployment, training, IEC, Clinical 7
Examination and referral
Coordination, Recording, Monitoring and Supervision, 8
Prevention Control (IPC) measures, Catering, Laundry
and other related activities, Biomedical waste (BMW)
management
Logistic management, IEC, sampling, Discharge , Terminal 10-12
Disinfection
Daily Reporting format-Annex1 13
SOPs for medical personnel-Annex 2 14
SOPs for nursing staff-Annex 3 15
SOPs for movement of staff-Annex 4 16
SOPs for security staff-Annex 5 17
Supplies for the quarantine facility-Annex 6 18
HR for quarantine facility- Annex7 19
SoPs for screening of personnel entering quarantine facility- 20
Annex 8
SoPs for Disinfection-Annex 9 21
Guidelines for Biomedical waste management-Annex 10 28
Guidelines for facility incharge and quarantine people at the 32
time of discharge-Annex 11
Checklist for Establishing a Quarantine facility 35
3
1.0. Introduction
Quarantine is the separation and restriction of movement or activities of persons
who are not ill but who are believed to have been exposed to infection, for the
purpose of preventing transmission of diseases. Persons are usually quarantined in
their homes, but they may also be quarantined in community-based facilities.
Quarantine can be applied to
• An individual or to a group of persons who are exposed at a large public
gathering or to persons believed exposed on a conveyance during
international travel.
• A wider population- or geographic-level basis.
Examples of this application include the closing of local or community borders or
erection of a barrier around a geographic area (cordon sanitaire) with strict
enforcement to prohibit movement into and out of the area.
The purpose of this document is to provide guidelines for setting up of
quarantine facilities during the current COVID-19 outbreak.
The recommended duration of quarantine for Covid-19 based on available
information is upto 14 days from the time of exposure.
The purpose of quarantine during the current outbreak is to reduce transmission by
• Separating contacts of COVID-19 patients from community
• Monitoring contacts for development of sign and symptoms of COVID-19,
and
• Segregation of COVID-19 suspects, as early as possible from among other
quarantined persons
The scope of this document is to cover the procedures required for
• Physical infrastructure/Functional Services requirement at quarantine
facilities
• Procedure for medical monitoring of contacts, reporting formats
• Protocol for referrals of suspects/ Symptomatics and isolation of
symptomatics if required temporarily
• Infection control practices by medical personnel, supporting staffs and
catering staffs etc.
4
2.0. Evaluation of potential sites for facility-based
quarantine is important for preparedness planning
(Checklist at Annexure-11).
Requirements for Quarantine facility in a community-based facility is as
under
1. Location:
• preferably placed in the outskirt of the urban/ city area (can be a
hostel/unused health facilities/buildings, etc.)
• away from the people’s reach, crowded and populated area
• well protected and secured (preferably by security personnel/
army)
• preferably should have better approachability to a tertiary hospital
facility having critical care and isolation facility
2. Access considerations
• Parking space including Ambulances etc.
• Ease of access for delivery of food/medical/other supplies
• Differently-abled Friendly facilities (preferably)
3. Ventilation capacity: Well ventilated preferably natural
4. Basic infrastructure/functional requirements:
• Rooms/Dormitory separated from one another may be preferable with
in-house capacity of 5-10 beds/room
• Each bed to be separated 1-2 meters (minimum 1 metre) apart from all
sides.
• Lighting, well-ventilation, heating, electricity, ceiling fan
• Potable water to be available
• Functional telephone system for providing communications.
• Support services- fooding, snacks, recreation areas including television
• Laundry services
• Sanitation services/Cleaning and House keeping
• Properly covered bins as per BMW may be placed
5. Space requirements for the facility:
• Administrative offices- Main control room/clerical room
• Logistics areas/Pharmaceutical rooms
5
• Rest rooms- doctors/nurses/supporting staffs
• Clinical examination room/ nursing station / Sampling area
• Laundry facilities (on- or off-site)
• Mess/Meal preparation (on- or off-site)
• Holding area for contaminated waste
• Wash room/Bathroom/Toilet
6. Social support resources/ Recreational areas
• Television and radio / Reading materials/ indoor plays
7. Monitoring the health of contacts: During that period, contacts should be
monitored at least daily for fever and respiratory symptoms.
2.2. Standard operating Procedures: To ensure smooth operation in the
quarantine facility, the standard Operative procedures (SOPs) needs to be framed as
under
• Daily monitoring surveillance using the daily reporting format (annex
1)
• Fever triage/ Isolation
• Case and contact monitoring and response
• Transfers of suspect/symptomatic to designated hospital (through
ambulances)
• Public information
• Provider information (SOPs)
• medical personnel (annex 2),
• nursing staff (annex 3),
• movement of health personnel and support staff (annex 4) and
• security staff (annex 5)
Functional flow should be maintained to reduce/minimise the interactions
between quarantine people and healthcare professionals/supporting staffs so
that transmission of disease is prevented and controlled
3.0. Risk assessment of the quarantine facility
The risk level refers to how likely it is that someone in the Quarantine
camp will become infected with corona virus as a result of movements and
activities performed in the Quarantine camp.
Risk assessment includes identification of the biohazard risk precaution
levels, along with its associated activities. The risk level refers to how
6
likely it is that someone in the Quarantine camp will become infected with
corona virus as a result of procedures performed in the Quarantine camp.
Areas were sagregated and labeled as:
• Low risk areas: Areas having less direct contact with evacuee
suspects such as control room center in the quarantine center,
nursing station and areas of kitchen where food is cooked.
• Moderate risk areas: Moderate risk areas are where infectious
aerosols are generated from areas where the suspects were inhabiting
in their bed linen, pillows and nearby clothes; low concentration of
infectious particles. Contaminated surface near the quarantine zones.
• High risk areas (containment Quarantine camp): Areas where
direct dealing with the suspects are as under
Medical examination room, sample collection areas( high
concentration of infectious particles while coughing, sneezing, gag
reflex during nasopharangeal & oropharangeal sample collection).
Toilet and bathroom areas, dining areas, areas of bio-waste
collections, segregation and disposal.
Based on risk assessment, areas should be earmarked and infection
prevention control measures to be applied as per MOHFW
guidelines.
4.0 Securing Entry and Exit points
• In order to prevent and control infection in the facility,
strategic points in the facility needs to be identified
including
• The Control room where a person entering inside quarantined
building to get proper awareness and training on infection
control measures,
• A well informed and trained security to check (main entrance
gate of the area) and a guard (24*7) with registers for ins and
outs and a designated nursing officer for checking proper
PPE wear (main entrance gate in the building)
• The international biohazard warning symbol and sign to be
displayed on the doors of the rooms where suspects are kept,
BMW management areas,samples of higher risk groups are
handled
7
• Only authorized & trained persons or those designated in
work areas to permitted to enter the quarantine areas;
• Doors to keep closed at all times preferably
under observation of a guard.
• There should be double door entry was managed with
only one door to be open at a single time.
5.0 . Human resource Deployment: In the quarantine facility, Chief
Medical officer needs to be appointed as In-charge /nodal officer for
overall coordination and supervision of the quarantine center. Services
of General duty medical doctors, Medicine specialists, Pediatrics,
Microbiologist (for diagnostic support and IPC), Psychiatrists &
Psychologists are required for routine examination and relevant clinical
care of the quarantined people. Para-medics including Staff Nurse and
Lab. Technician, Pharmacist need to be posted. Public health specialist
are required for monitoring public health aspects of the facility while
services of clinical microbiologist are required for sample collection,
packaging and infection prevention & control practices. House keeping
staff also need to be deployed.
6.0 Training – Training is the most important and critical part to ensure that all
activities takes place as per established protocol and SOPs, training of health
care professionals and other relevant staffs was undertaken initially.
Training of medical officers on SOPs needs to be followed at Quarantine
centers for daily examination, movements in the facility, infection
prevention control measures and use of PPE kit etc.
Training of clinicians, laboratory technicians and medics needs to be
undertaken on appropriate sample collection (nasopharyngeal and throat)
and triple layer packaging with cold chain maintenance.
Paramedical staffs i.e., staff nurses; medics, pharmacist etc. needs to be
trained on SOPs to be followed at Quarantine centers and use of PPE kit. Staff
undertaking the work in Laundry, Mess/Canteen, security and other related
staff i.e., drivers, general duty staff etc. needs to be trained on use of mask,
gloves , cleaning and disinfection procedures and use of PPE kit, etc.
Refresher training or regular direction to all the above staffs needs to be
provided as on need basis. During the quarantine period as and when new staff
was posted, it needs to be ensured that he/she received proper training before
undertaking the work. It is to emphasized that all activities / procedures must
be done under strict monitoring/observations of trained specialists.
7.0 . Daily Clinical Examination and referral - All quarantined people needs to
be examined twice (morning & evening) daily clinically and those requiring
8
referrals for related symptoms of Corona virus (fever, cough, sore throat,
breathlessness etc.) or any other reason needs to be referred to designated
hospital in ambulance directly with due precautions as per referral SOP.
Ambulances need to be placed in the facility in standby mode for transport
including advanced lifesaving ambulance.
Daily census of the people needs to be undertaken twice a day (ex. Morning 8
am and evening 6 pm).
8.0 Coordination– Chief medical officer needs to supervise and coordinate with
various organizations working with the facility. To ensure all activities take
place according to standard protocol, separate teams were constituted for
various purposes- Supervisory team, admin team, logistic team, referral team,
medicine / equipment team, hygiene sanitation team.
Daily review meetings needs to be conducted under chairmanship of Chief
medical officer to discuss day to day affairs and sort out any issue requiring
attention.
24*7 control room needs to be established at the facility with monitor for
CCTV cameras and speakers at each floor so that quarantined people can be
communicated on routine basis and necessary instructions can be provided.
9.0 Recording and reporting mechanisms- To ensure standardized reporting,
daily reporting formats of suspected cases with symptoms related to corona
virus, no. of cases requiring referral, sample collection status needs to designed
(as per annexure 1). It needs to be sent daily to relevant higher authorities.
10.0 Monitoring and Supervision – Daily monitoring visit needs to be conducted
inside quarantine facility and outside the facility in the surrounding campus by
public health and incharge officers and gaps to be noted. Necessary
corrective actions and preventive actions to be taken by the nodal officer.
Visits also given by senior officers from for regular review.
11.0 Establishment of Infection Prevention Control (IPC) measures – As per risk
assessment was undertaken with respect to probability of infection from possibly
infected quarantine people to health care, other staffs and surrounding areas.
Special map of the facility needs to be prepared to outline the details of movement
of health care and other personnel around the quarantine area and in the building.
It need to be ensured that movement of health care staffs and other personnel to
undertake as per the designed map to prevent and control infections.
Separate fence needs to be raised around the building to prevent entry of animals
especially dogs, monkeys and even birds if possible.
9
Well informed and trained security personnel needs to be deployed all around the
building on 24*7 rotation basis to monitor the facility and to avoid entry of un-
desired persons/animals and even birds for eating any food remains/droppings
inside the area.
To ensure that all health care personnel use PPE as per guidelines, they need to be
properly trained and assisted during wearing of PPE. Separate areas to be
earmarked for PPE Donning and Doffing. Compliance for same to be ensured by
nodal officer.
Separate well informed and trained nursing officers need to be stationed at the
building to regulate the movement of the staffs entering the facility. He/ She
should be assigned the duty that every person entering the facility enters in the
register of all the details on time of name, designation entry/exit. Nursing officer
to ensure that all the persons are labeled while entering the building so that they
can be identified by security staff. At the entrance, two door entries may be
ensured to avoid mixing of quarantine people with health care staff.
It is to be ensured that all the quarantine facility is decontaminated daily (refer to
infection prevention control guidelines) with disinfectants (freshly prepared 1%
hypochlorite, detergent solution) including surface mopping of all the floor,
bathrooms, toilets facility, under side of beds, other related items placed in the
rooms of quarantine people .
A separate cubicle for people developing mild symptoms for temporary
observation (transit room) may be considered so that it will lead to an early
isolation of any symptomatic person and to prevent transmission to other cluster
of groups.
12.0 Lodging, Catering, Laundry and other related activities –Disposable and
pre-packed food to be needs to be served to quarantined people. All the
quarantined people to be kept on separate beds with distance of 1-2 meters
with no bed facing opposite to each other. All Beds were having disposable
bed sheet that should be changed on daily basis. Personal toiletries/ towel/
blanket/ pillow with covers/electric kettle, room heater and water dispenser
may be provided to each person depending on availability.
A separate room needs to be assigned to perform laundry services for cleaning
of all the clothes and other washing related activities. Before laundering, all the
washable items needs to be placed in 1% hypochlorite up to 30 minutes and
later washed in detergent solution.
10
13.0 Biomedical waste (BMW) management- To ensure that biomedical
waste management in the facility takes place as per standard guidelines,
separate yellow, red /black bags, foot operating dustbins needs to be kept at
each floor and outside the facility. It is to strictly ensured that Doffing takes
place in the designated area with all the PPE kit including mask, gloves is
properly placed in yellow bags. All the health care workers collecting the
possible infectious material such as food items, PPE kits from yellow bags
should also wear PPE and following the IPC measures. Designated place to
be earmarked outside the building for collection of yellow and black bags.
It should be collected at least twice daily by biomedical waste management
vehicle/any other local established practice.
Site of collection of biomedical waste should be regularly disinfected with
freshly prepared 1% hypochlorite solution. All officials concerned with the
administration and all other health care workers including medical,
paramedical, nursing officers, other paramedical staff and waste handlers
such as safaikarmacharis, attendants & Sanitation attendants needs to be
well oriented to requirements of handling and management of general and
biomedical waste generated at the facility. Steps in the management of
biomedical waste include generation, accumulation, handling, storage,
treatment, transport and disposal as mentioned in the SOP needs to be
followed. Continuous training, monitoring & supervision to monitor the
implementation to be done on daily basis to manage compliance related
issues. All the generated waste from Quarantine facility to be treated as
isolation waste and its disinfection /treatment was strictly monitored by
specialists in the health authorities.
14.0 Logistic management- All logistic to be used in quarantine facility i.e., PPE
, medical equipments i.e. Thermal thermometer, Stethoscope, BP machine etc.,
office logistic, sample collection and packaging material, etc.to purchased in
advance.
Performa needs to be prepared for daily consumption of PPE, triple layer
mask, gloves, etc. and monitored by logistic team on daily basis.
15.0 Information, Education & Communication (IEC) and Psycho-social
support – As on arrival, there might be an obvious sense of psychological fear
and panic among all the quarantine people and some of the involved stakeholders
like health care professionals/staffs including doctors, security personnel etc.. An
interpersonal communication needs to made to all of them one after another in
groups by Psychiatrist team initially and later on with individual counselling
sessions. Quarantine people needs to be explained on Universal infection control
11
measures , personal protective measures, written instructions on Do’s and Don’ts
in the quarantine zone to be provided to contain and avoid spread of the infection.
Importance of frequent Hand washing specially after touching surfaces like door
handles, stair railings, bed railings, etc. to be instructed for strict compliance.
Everyday quarantine people to be counseled by clinicians regarding day to day
queries. If needed, referral to be made to psychiatrist /psychologist team. If there
is fear in the surrounding community it needs to be addressed.
16.0 Sample collection and packaging – For baseline testing, Samples
(Nasopharyngeal swab and throat swabs) for COVID-19 need to be collected
from all quarantine people & sent with triple layer packaging maintained in
cold chain (2-8o
C) to designated laboratory .
Safe collection & handling of specimens in the Quarantine camp needs to be
performed in identified locations as per the SOP. Specimen containers
generally used are viral transport medim (VTM vials containing 3 ml medium)
with falcon tubes (50 ml) as secondary layer of Triple layer packaging system.
Containers needs to be correctly labeled to facilitate proper identification.
Specimen request or specification forms to be placed in separate waterproof
zip pouch envelopes with locking facility and pasted on the outside walls of the
sample transport containers (Performa annexure). Just before the end of the 14
days quarantine period, resampling of nasopharyngeal swabs needs to be done.
17.0 Discharge of quarantine people from Quarantine Facility - The
quarantine people needs to be discharged at the end of 14 days of incubation
period provided samples are negative on resampling. Instructions should be
provided to self-monitor their health at their home (home quarantine) for next
14 days and immediately report to their District Surveillance officer (DSO), in
case of development of symptoms suggestive of COVID-19. Written
instructions were handed over to them individually. The District Surveillance
Units (DSO) and State Surveillance Units (SSO) to be provided with contact
details of the quarantine people to conduct active surveillance for next 14 days
under intimation to the Central Surveillance Unit, IDSP (NCDC).
18.0 Terminal Disinfection and decontamination procedures: Quarantine
facility terminal disinfection procedures to be performed as per guidelines.
Cleaning/ decontamination to be performed using the proper
personal protective equipment (PPE) and adopting three bucket system as
prescribed in the SOP (at attached annexure).
Spraying of 1% sodium hypochlorite working solution (dilution 1:4 from an
initial concentration of 4%) to be done on all the surfaces (protecting electrical
points/appliances). This was followed by cleaning with a neutral detergent that
is used for removing the traces formed by hypochlorite solution. While
12
cleaning, windows need to be opened in order to protect the health of cleaning
personnel.
All frequently touched areas, such as all accessible surfaces of walls and
windows, the toilet bowl and bathroom surfaces needs to be carefully cleaned.
All textiles (e.g. pillow linens, curtains, etc.) should be first treated with 1%
hypochlorite spray and then, packed and sent to get washed in laundry using a
hot-water cycle (90°C) and adding laundry detergent. 1% hypochlorite solution
should also sprayed in the PPE doffing area and discard area twice a day on
daily basis. Mattresses / pillows after spraying with 1% hypochlorite should be
allowed to get dry (both sides) in bright sunlight for upto 3 hrs each.
13
Annex 1
DAILY REPORTING FORMAT
(Daily Clinical Examination)
COVID-19
Name of the Centre:
Address:
Centre In Charge:
Contact No:
S.no Date of Census Clinically Suggestive Other Cases Cumulative Cases Cases still Census Remarks
reporting in the examined Symptoms clinical referred to cases discharged admitted in the
Centre like fever, cases designated referred to from at Centre
(8 cough, and hospital designated designated designated (8PM)
AM) breathing non hospital hospital hospital
difficulty, 2019-
other nCoV
respiratory
problems,
etc
M FM FM F M FM FM FM FM F
14
Annex 2
Standard Operative Producers for medical personnel
There are shift duties of the doctors may be as under
Morning : 800AM to 200 PM
Afternoon : 200PM to 800 PM
Night : 800PM to 800 AM (next day)
General instructions for medical doctors from designated hospital (s) for
performing their duty at Quarantine facility may be as under:
a. The name of the duty officers and duty roster for to be
displayed at the control room.
b. Each team to follow the procedure mentioned below:
c. The resident doctors on duty will report to the centre at
the reporting time and mark attendance in the register.
d. After that, they will go to clinical area to examine the
quarantined people in the centre.
e. The doctors on working duty will team up with medical officers from Quarantine
facility to form a paired team (one from hospital and another from the Quarantine
facility) to examine the cases.
f. They will examine and assess the patients and report to the In-charge of the
Quarantine facility.
g. They will take care of the infection control/protective measures while examining the
persons and follow guidelines placed at the door for safety/infection control
measures.
h. If any symptomatic case/ additional symptoms are observed/ reported, it should be
discussed with the In-charge of the Quarantine facility for referral to the designated
hospital, if required.
i. They will complete examination of all patients and report before 12 noon on the
same day and handover the report to the Office In-charge for onward transmission to
the Ministry.
j. They will not leave till the next relieving team arrived.
k. They will hand over this information to the next relieving team.
l. They will leave the Quarantine facility with due permission of In-charge of the
Quarantine facility.
m. If any doctor has not reported due to unavoidable circumstances, present available
team will inform to the concerned authority of designated hospital for substitute.
n. In case any patient needs to be transferred due to any eventuality to the referral
centre, senior most doctor will accompany the ALS Ambulance to take care of the
patient till he/she reaches and handed over to the centre.
o. The medical team may take help of psychiatric/ counsellor team if required,
for psychosocial support
p. Team to work in harmony with the Quarantine facility medical team.
 The senior most doctor on duty from the designated hospital will take
decision of the clinical management.
15
Annex 3
Standard Operative Producers for Nursing Officer
(supervisor)
• Maintain log of medical professionals/staffs entering/exiting in the quarantine
facility, where the quarantine people are housed.
• A designated nursing officer (infection prevention & control nurse) has to ensure that
the incoming officers/ staff to the quarantine building that are wearing appropriate
PPE, and they are aware of universal infection control precautions {hand washing
(alcohol/ sanitizers or soap + water; mask, gloves, PPE).
• After this he/she will allow the person to enter.
• The PPE doffed off by the outgoing medical professionals needs to be disposed in
the yellow bag and hand sanitization should be ensured after disposing the PPE.
(PPE- donning On / doffing Off enclosed).
• Yellow bags containing the infected materials placed in the nearby gate should be
disposed off daily as per the Biomedical Waste Management Rules.
• The dustbins should be covered at all times. This should be ensured by Nursing
officer. If required, disinfection has to be done as advised.
• Black bags (municipal wastes) - to be disposed after proper packaging daily as per
the Biomedical Waste Management Rules.
• Supervise IPC in the facility in coordination with Microbiologist/Clinician
16
Annex 4
Standard Operative Producers for Movement of Health
Professionals and Support Staff Inside the Quarantine facility
The movements of health professionals are to be monitored at three vital points considering
the control of infection for the prevailing disease-
CONTROL ROOM:
• Health professionals and support staff need to be made aware and trained in
correct procedure of wearing mask and gloves.
• They need to be trained to follow the infection control measures as instructed
including
o hand washing with soap and water and sanitizing with alcohol-based
sanitizers,
o cough etiquettes,
o donning and doffing of PPE etc.
o before entering the quarantine facility.
Main Gate Security post: To monitor entry of persons/visitors to the facility and ensure that
the personnel should comply with instructions / including wear the mask correctly.
Nursing Station at Quarantine building (ground floor):
1. Registration of name with time and purpose for entering the building
2. PPE should be donned here.
3. Nursing officer will check and ensure strict and correct wearing of PPE
before entering the main quarantine area
4. After coming out from the main quarantine area, PPE to be doffed properly
and placed in the designated bin for infective material (Yellow bag)
5. The hands should be sanitized before exiting the quarantine area
6. Mobile phones are not allowed to be used inside the building
7. Name of doctors to be written on the PPE with permanent marker for
identification.
17
Annexure-5
Standard Operative Producers for Security Personnel at
Quarantine facility
1. For security purpose, ensure 24 hours manning of the post of the quarantine
facility.
2. The person manning the area must be trained and instructed to wear mask
and gloves during the duty period.
3. Instructions for infection control measures like hand washing etc. should be
properly briefed.
4. Doctors/Nursing staff/supporting staffs/other entering the quarantine area
should wear appropriate PPE before entering the quarantine centers.
5. Log of those entering/exiting the Quarantine facility should be maintained.
Only those having specific purpose inside the Quarantine facility should be
allowed to enter.
6. The log should be put up daily to the controlling authority.
7. Security guard should have a whistle to give signals to people to not
come near the quarantine facility if they do not have any purpose to visit
the Quarantine facility.
8. He should report immediately to the officer In-charge controlling the
security of the quarantine facility, if anybody does not follow the instructions
as directed.
9. The security personnel should not leave after completing his shift till his
reliever reports for duty.
10. The officer In-charge controlling the security of the quarantine facility will
supervise the duty roster and roles and responsibilities of all the personnel
deployed at the quarantine area for smooth functioning.
18
Annexure-6
Requirements of Equipment for Quarantine Facility
Equipment
Daily Consumption for
holding 300 persons
Gloves
• reusable vinyl or rubber gloves for environmental
200
cleaning
• latex single-use gloves for clinical care
Hair covers (optional) 1500
Particulate respirators (N95, FFP2, or equivalent)
150
Medical (surgical or procedure) masks 1500
Gowns and aprons (single-use long-sleeved fluid-resistant or 150
reusable non-fluid-resistant gowns )
PPE Kit 130
Alcohol-based hand rub 50
Plain soap (liquid if possible, for washing hands in clean 500
water)
Clean single-use towels (e.g. paper towels)
1500
Sharps containers
5
Appropriate detergent for environmental cleaning and
20 litres
disinfectant for disinfection of surfaces, instruments or
equipment
Large plastic bags
200
Appropriate clinical waste bags
100
Linen bags
500
Collection container for used equipment
200
19
Annexure - 7
Human Resource requirement for Quarantine Facility
The requisite human resources at a Quarantine Facility can be divided into two broad
categories:
General Requirements of medical personnel for the facility as under
Medical personnel- ( catering facility of 300 people )
I. On- Duty Doctors in 6 hours shift of 2 doctors
II. Nusring Staff in 6 hours shift of 4 nurses
III. Lab. Technicians in 6 hours shift of 4 technicians
1. Health professionals: (Multi-disciplinary team)
• Medical doctors (Multi-Speciality team)- General duty doctors, Specialists like
Medicine, Paediatrician, Psychiatrist / Psychologist, Public Health specialist,
Microbiologist etc.
• Nursing officers
• Pharmacists
• Paramedics
• Lab. Technicians (preferably)
2. Supporting staffs like Safai Karamchari, Housekeeping, Laundry workers, Cooks, etc.
3. Security staffs
20
Annexure- 8
Checklist for screening entry of persons inside the quarantine building
• Only authorised personnel should enter the quarantine facility for carrying out pre-
determined activity. While entering the quarantine facility, it should be ensured that
personnel are wearing the requisite personal protective equipment
• A pre-identified staff should be designated to screen the personnel entering in the
quarantine facility using following check-list.
I. Is the person entering the quarantine building either doctors/nursing officers/
supporting staffs/ Govt. officials etc. posted or authorized to enter the
quarantine building in the Centre?
II. Whether the person entering the quarantine building is having duty inside the
building during that time?
III. Whether the person entering wear protective suit correctly?
IV. Whether the person entering wear N-95 Mask correctly?
V. Whether the person entering wear goggles correctly?
VI. Whether the person entering wear headgear correctly?
VII. Whether the person entering wear boots correctly?
VIII. Whether PPE has no gaps/physical damages which can be a risk in the
disease transmission?
IX. If it is ‘YES’ in all Qs from 1to 9, then, the person is allowed to enter the
quarantine building.
X. If any of the Qs is NO, then , to ask for appropriate donning of PPE initially and if not still
then, to contact the concerned officer supervising the
nursing officers and if required, NCDC Team on duty /In-charge of the center.
21
Annexure – 9
Guidelines for Disinfection of quarantine facility (for COVID-19)
(Refer to NCDC Website for latest updates)
Guidelines for disinfection of quarantine facility (for COVID-19)
Scope: This document aims to provide interim guidance about the environmental cleaning /
decontamination in quarantine camp facilities (e.g. barracks, cubicles in rooms, offices, and toilets, etc.)
where persons with potential exposure to COVID-19 have housed.
The causative agent involved in the current outbreaks of 2019-nCoV acute respiratory disease, the
2019-nCoV (genus: Betacoronavirus), belongs to the family of Coronaviridae, a large family of
enveloped, positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses. Coronaviruses are transmitted in most instances
through large respiratory droplets and contact transmission, but other modes of transmission have also
been proposed worldwide.
The time of survival and the conditions affecting the 2019-nCoV viability in the environment are
currently unknown. According to studies assessing the environmental stability of other coronaviruses,
the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) is estimated to survive several days in
the environment and the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV) more than
48 hours at an average room temperature (20°C) on different surfaces [1-3].
Environmental cleaning: Due to the potential survival of the virus in the environment for several days,
the premises and areas potentially contaminated with the 2019-nCoV should be cleaned before their
re-use, using products containing antimicrobial agents known to be effective against coronaviruses.
Although there is lack of specific evidence for their effectiveness against 2019-nCoV virus, cleaning with
water and household detergents and use of common disinfectant products should be sufficient for
general precautionary cleaning. Tests carried out using SARS-CoV showed that sodium hypochlorite is
effective.
These guidelines provide guidance for environmental cleaning in quarantine facilities housing people
exposed/ potential exposure toCOVID-19 and have been adapted based on the Hospital Infection
Prevention and Control guidelines drafted by NCDC in collaboration with WHO and other stakeholders.
22
Area/Items Item/Equipment Process Method/ Procedure
Clinical Area
General clinical areas Dust mops Sweeping • Sweep with the dust mop or
Mop Cleaning damp mop to remove surface
(No broom will be
Daily mopping
dust. Sweep under the furniture
used for sweeping) and remove dust from corners.
Gathered dust must be removed
using a hearth brush and shovel.
• The sweep tool should be
cleaned or replaced after use.
Floors (clinical areas) –
daily mopping
Detergent/ • Prepare cleaning solution
sanitizer–hot using detergent with
water, sodium warm water
hypochlorite(1%) • Use the three-bucket
Three buckets
technique for mopping the
floor, one bucket with plain
(one with plain
water and one with the
water and one
detergentsolution.
with detergent
• First mop the area with the warm
solution;
water and detergent solution.
one bucket for
• After mopping clean the mop in
sodium plain water and squeeze it.
hypochlorite(1%) • Repeat this procedure for the
remaining area.
• Mop area again using sodium
hypochlorite 1% after drying the
area.
• In between mopping if solution
or water is dirty change it
frequently.
• Mop the floor starting at the
far corner of the room and
work towards thedoor.
• Clean articles between
cleaning.
Note: Mopping should be done
twice a day
Ceiling and Walls Sweeping tool Damp dusting • Damp dusting with a long
handledtool for the walls and
Duster
ceiling done with very little
Bowl/ small bucket
moisture, just enough to collect
of soap solution
thedust.
Plain water
• Damp dusting should be done
in straight lines that overlap
one another.
• Change the mop head/cover when
soiled.
Note: Should be done once a week or
after examining a suspect case
23
Care of mop Hot water Detergent • Clean with hot water and
Sodium hypochlorite detergent solution, disinfect it with
1% sodium hypochlorite and keep for
drying upsidedown.
Doors and door knobs Damp cloth or Sponge Thorough washing • The doors are to be washed with
squeeze mop a brush, using detergent and
Detergent water once a week (on one
defined day); gently apply cloth
to soiled area, taking care not to
remove paint, then wipe with
warm water to remove excess
cleaningagent.
• Door knobs and other frequently
touched surfaces should be
cleaned daily.
Isolation room Detergent/ Sanitizer– Terminal cleaning • Before cleaning an isolation
warm water, sodium room, liaise with infection
hypochlorite (1%) control team for details of any
Three buckets special requirements. Staff will
(one with plain be instructed on specific cleaning
water and one procedures required with
with detergent reference to
solution);
• Safety uniform to be worn.
separate bucket for
• Chemicals or disinfectants to be
sodium hypochlorite
(1%) used.
• Also, if bed screen and shower
screen are to be cleaned or
changed, refer cleaning in
isolation rooms.
All clinical areas/ Sodium hypochlorite Blood and body fluid • Wear non-sterile gloves.
(1%)
Laboratories/ Wherever spill care
• For large spills, cover with
Rag piece
spill care is required
Absorbent paper absorbent paper/ rag piece
Unsterile gloves • if any broken glass and sharps,
Spill care kit using a pair of forceps and
Mop gloves, carefully retrieve.Use a
Hot water large amount of folded absorbent
paper to collect small glass
splinters. Place the broken items
into the puncture proof sharps
container.
• Cover the spill with sodium
hypochlorite(1%)for 10–20
minutes contact time.
• Clean up spill and discard into
infectious waste bin, and mop
area with soap and hot water.
• Clean the mop and mop area
with 1% sodium hypochlorite.
• Wash mop with detergent and
hot water and allow it to dry.
24
Stethoscope Alcohol-based Cleaning • Should be cleaned with detergent
rub/Spirit swab and water.
• Should be wiped with alcohol
based rub/spirit swab before each
patient contact.
BP cuffs and covers Detergent Washing • Cuffsshouldbewipedwithalcohol-
Hot water based disinfectant and regular
laundering is recommended for
the cover.
Thermometer Detergent and water Cleaning • Should be stored dry in individual
Alcohol rub Individual holder.
thermometer holder • Clean with detergent and tepid
water and wipe with alcohol rub
in between patient use.
• Store in individual holder
inverted.
• Preferably one thermometer for
each patient.
Injection and dressing Detergent and water Cleaning • To be cleaned daily with
trolley
Duster Disinfectant
detergent and water.
(70% alcohol) • After each use should be wiped
with disinfectant.
Refrigerators Detergent and water Cleaning (weekly) • Empty the fridge and store
Absorbent paper or
thingsappropriately.
clean cloth • Defrost, decontaminate and clean
with detergent.
• Dry it properly and replace the
things.
• Weekly cleaning is recommended.
Area/Items Item/Equipment
Process
Method/ procedure
Lodging area
General cleaning Detergent and Daily mopping
• Scrub floors with hot water and detergent with using
minimal water. (Do not pour thewater.)
warm water floors
• Clean with plainwater.
Mop
• Allow to dry
Two buckets Clean Thorough
• Hypochlorite 1% mopping canbe
utility gloves washing
done.
Handmops
Note:Recommend general cleaning procedure should
be done twice a day
Lockers, Damp duster Damp dusting • Damp dust with warm waterand
Warm water
tables, detergent.
Detergent
cupboard,
Dry duster
wardrobes,
benches, shelves
and cots
Railings Detergent/ Daily dusting • Damp dust with warm water and detergent followed
Sanitizer–hotwater, by disinfection with hypochlorite
sodium hypochlorite
25
1%
Three small
buckets/ or big
bowls
One with plain
water
One with detergent
solution
One for sodium
hypochlorite 1%
Mirrors and Warm water Cleaning • Using warm water and a small quantity of detergent
Glass Detergent water/ and using a damp cloth, wipe over the mirror and
cleaning solution surround, then using a dry lint-free cloth, buff the
Damp cloth Wiper mirror and glass to a clean dryfinish.
Sluice room Powder cleanser Cleaning • Sinks are to be cleaned witha
Stainless steel/ Detergent powder powder cleanser.
Any other sink Wiper • Firstwetthesink.Sprinkleonalittle powder cleanser and
Cloth work around the surface with a cloth, include the
plughole.
• Do not use the powder cleanseron
dry sink.
• After removing spillage and any stains, flush away with
running water. Wipe down the surface of the sink.
Pantry furniture Duster Dusting • Dampdust
Telephone Warm water General cleaning • Damp dust with warm waterand
detergent solution detergent.
Duster • Payingspecialattentiontotheear
and mouth piece and dry it properly.
Desks Damp cloth Dusting • Wipe top sides and draw handles with a damp cloth.
Furniture polish Wooden desks should be cleaned with furniture polish
and buffed to clear glows. Pen holder etc. to be cleaned
ordusted.
Chairs (Vinyl) Warm water and Cleaning • Wipe down with warm water and detergent. Remove
detergent any marks under arms and seat. Check fordamage
to stoppers, if stopper require replacement, report to
maintenance department.
Furniture and Warm water and Dusting • Using warm water and detergent, damp dust all
fittings detergent furniture and fittings, including chairs, stools, beds,
Rag piece tables, cupboards, wardrobes, lockers, trolleys,
benches, shelves and storage racks, waste/ bins, fire
extinguishers, oxygen cylinders, televisions window sills
and dry properly.
Bed tables, Warm water and Cleaning • Wipe down over bed table. Wipe top and underneath
bedside lockers detergent base and stand, using warm water and detergent. Dry
Wiper Duster oncompletion.
• Wipe down the bedside. Remove marks from fronts
of draws and sides. Using warm water and detergent,
wash the top to remove any sticky marks anddust.
Light switches Damp cloth (never Cleaning • Light switches to be cleaned of dust, spots and finger
26
and over-bed wet) marks. Clean with a damp cloth (never wet) and
lights Detergent detergent.
Warm water • Over-bed lighting to be damp dusted. Clean with warm
water and detergent.
Curtains Soft clothes Cleaning • Clean with water and soap for curtains
Water
Mild soap solution
White clothes Sodium Washing • Should be washed under running water and soaked in
hypochlorite 1% 1% sodium hypochlorite for 20minutes.
Tap water Note: PPE should be worn while washing soiled linen.
Mattress and Tap water Washing • Mattress and pillows should be covered with a
pillow covers reusable mattress cover.
(cloth)
• It should be changed for each patient and when soiled
sent to the laundry according to schedule.
Mattress/ Terminal • If with rexin cover, can be cleaned with 1% sodium
Pillow with
Sodium Damp dusting
hypochlorite before use for next patient
rexin cover
hypochlorite 1% and cleaning
• If routine mattress, dry it in bright sunlight for 1-2
Normal/ Sunlight Drying in sunlight days before using for next patient
without
rexin
Water jars Vim powder Soap Cleaning • Recommended boiled water for drinking
and water • Water jars should be scrubbed/ cleaned with soap and
water and boiled water before filling withwater.
Areas Agents / Toilet cleaner Procedure
Cleaning of toilets
Toilet pot/ Sodium hypochlorite 1%/ • Inside of toilet pot/commode:
commode Soap powder / long handle angular • Scrub with the recommended agents and
brush the long handle angular brush.
• Outside: Clean with recommended agents;
use a nylon scrubber.
Lid/commode Nylon scrubber and soap powder • Wet and scrub with soap powder and the
nylon scrubber inside and outside
Toilet floor Soap powder and scrubbing brush/ • Scrub floor with soap powder and the
nylon broom scrubbing brush
• Wash with water
• Use sodium hypochlorite1% dilution
Tap Nylon scrubber and soap powder • Wet and scrub with soap powder and the
nylon scrubber.
Outside sink Soap powder and nylon scrubber • Scrub with the nylon scrubber.
Showers area / Warm water • Thoroughly scrub the floors/tiles with
Taps and fittings Detergent powder warm water and detergent
Nylon Scrubber • Wipe over taps and fittings with a damp
cloth and detergent.
• Care should be taken to clean the
underside of taps and fittings.
27
• Taps should be dried aftercleaning
Soap dispensers Detergent and water
• Daily dusting
• Should be cleaned weeklywith
detergent and water and dried.
Note: Dry the floors with a separate drying mop.
28
Annexure- 10
SoPs for Management of Bio-medical Waste (BMW) in the Quarantine
Quarantine facility
“Bio-medical waste" means any waste, which is generated during the surveillance,
monitoring, diagnosis, treatment or immunization of quarantined personnel in health
Quarantine facility. The Bio-medical Waste Management rules are applicable to all persons
who generate, collect, receive, store, transport, treat, dispose, or handle bio medical waste
in any form at the quarantine Quarantine facility.
Management of Hospital/Healthcare/Biomedical waste at the quarantine Quarantine facility
is of utmost concern having global implications and immediate attention. It is documented
that even the general waste generated from Quarantine Quarantine facility is a potential
health hazard to the health care workers, public, flora and fauna of the area.
All officials concerned with the Quarantine facility administration and all other health care
workers including medical, dental, nursing officers, other paramedical staff and waste
handlers such as safai karmacharis, attendants & Sanitation attendants are well oriented to
requirements of handling and management of general and biomedical waste generated at the
Quarantine facility. Steps in the management of biomedical waste include generation,
accumulation, handling, storage, treatment, transport and disposal.
Organogram for Biomedical waste management( ITBP Chhawla):
Bio-medical waste has been classified in to 4 major categories to improve the segregation
of waste at the source itself:
29
Categories Type of Bags Type of Waste Treatment/Disposal
Non 1. Donned off PPE Incineration or Plasma
chlorinated 2. PPE with spill pyrolysis or deep burial*
plastic, 3. Gloves
4. Shoe covers
autoclavable
5. Head Covers
bags 6. disposable bed sheets
Non 1. Eye protection goggles Autoclaving/microwaving
chlorinated 2. recyclable materials /hydroclaving and
plastic, like pens then sent for recyling
3.plastic water bottles
autoclavable not be sent to landfill
used by quarantine
bags
people
4. Bed sheets
Puncture, leak, 1. sharpwaste including Auto or Dry Heat
tamper proof metals Sterilization
followed by shredding or
containers mutilation or
encapsulation
Glassware/tubelight/CFL Disinfection or
bulbs/LED used in autoclaving,
microwaving,
quarantine Quarantine hydroclaving
facility and then sent for
Cardboard recycling
boxes with blue
coloured
marking
Duties of the Quarantine Quarantine facility Authorities:
1. Provide training to all its health care workers and others involved in handling of bio
medical waste.
2. To provide a safe, ventilated and secured location for storage of segregated BMW
within premises of quarantine Quarantine facility.
3. Provide legal authorization and access to Waste collecting van/vehicle.
Duties of the Bio-medical waste management company (SMS water grace BMW Pvt.
Ltd.):
1. Ensure timely collection (atleast twice daily morning & evening) of BMW from
Quarantine Quarantine facility
2. Handing over of recyclable waste after treatment by autoclaving and incineration to
authorized agencies identified by Government of India.
3. Assist health care facilities in training of workers.
30
4. Provide PPE kits and other safety measures to their vehicle driver, collector, helper, safai
karamchari.
5. Issue authorized Identity card to all the persons coming to the Quarantine Quarantine
facilityus.
Treatment and Disposal:
1. Quarantine Quarantine facility does not have an onsite setup for BMW treatment
facilities there it should be taken to their designated BMW facility and treatment/disposal
must be done as per BMW regulations approved in their contract.
2. No untreated bio-medical waste shall be kept stored beyond a period of 48 hours.
3. All the waste (even the general waste) generated from the quarantine Quarantine facility
must be treated as Biomedical waste.
Maintenance of Records:
1. Records in relation to generation, collection, reception, storage, transportation, treatment
and disposal shall be maintained as per rules For 5 years.
Accident Reporting: In case of major accident-intimate immediately and submit a report
within 24 hours to the Quarantine facility incharge(CMO-Incharge ITBP Quarantine
facility).
Implementation:
Efficient implementation of the bio-medical waste management pivots on orientation,
training and
involvement of all the staff in the Quarantine facility. Ensuring proper disposal and
segregation at source is the most important step as this is the limiting factor for most health
care settings. Continuous training, monitoring & supervision to monitor the implementation
must be done on daily basis.
Generation to Disposal process:
1. BMW is collected from various sites in the quarantine facility.
2. All Collected Bags are loaded on to special Bio Medical Waste Trucks/Van and are
transported to BMW management facility for treatment and disposal thereafter.
31
Procedure/ Flowchart for Treatment of Biomedical Waste:
32
Annex 11
Guidelines for Quarantine facility Incharge, Health professionals, Quarantine
people and their family members to guide them with respect to the discharge
from Quarantine facility and follow up action in the community.
A. For the Quarantine facility Incharge & Health Professionals at the
Quarantine facility:
• The final sample collection for all the travellers shall be taken up on the
13th
and 14th
day while being in the facility.
• The samples shall be collected and sent to the designated laboratories.
• The reports for the same shall be received latest by 16th
/17th
day in the
facility through ICMR.
• Based on the reports a decision can be taken to discharge the travellers.
• Discharge shall accordingly, if agreed to, will be done on the 18th
day
from the Quarantine facility. Quarantine facility Incharge shall
accordingly intimate the travellers in advance for them to make
arrangement for their onward journey.
• A detailed enumeration of the proposed place of stay by the travllers during
the next 14 days will be obtained including contact numbers by the
Quarantine facility Incharge.
• The Quarantine facility Incharges will plan dropping the travellers in
either of the locations i.e. ISBT, Railway Station or Airport as per the
preference of the travellers.
B. For the Travellers in the Quarantine facility:
1. While travelling back home:
• Provide details of your stay for next 14 days including the contact
numbers.
• Obtain list of District and State Surveillance Officers for follow up and
reporting in case of any issue.
• Use triple layer surgical mask (follow correct use and disposal of mask
as briefed during the stay in quarantine centre)
• Follow frequent hand-wash with soap and water or use alcohol based
hand sanitizer.
• Use respiratory etiquettes (use tissue paper/ hand-kerchief to cover
your nose and mouth, turn head away from the person facing of you,
while coughing/ sneezing).
• Monitor your temperature twice daily.
33
• Retain the aircraft boarding pass/ rail ticket/ details of Journey by taxi
(including contact number of drivers etc)
2. After reaching home
• Avoid crowded places.
• Monitor your health for a period of next 14 days (after leaving the
quarantine centre).
• Monitor body temperature twice daily.
• At all times:
o Maintain personal hygiene
o Wash hands with soap and water frequently or use alcohol
based hand sanitizer.
o Use respiratory etiquettes (use tissue paper/ hand-kerchief to
cover your nose and mouth, turn head away from the person
facing of you, while coughing/ sneezing).
• Report to nearest health facility if you develop fever, cough or
difficulty in breathing besides reporting it to the State and District
Surveillance Officer.
• Allow attendance by health workers / respond to call received from
Health functionaries. Keep their contact numbers handy.
• Inform about your health at the end of 14 days period to the
Healthcare worker and State and District Surveillance Officer.
3. In case you develop fever, cough or difficulty in breathing any time
after leaving the quarantine Centre (within next 14 days):
• Call the nearest health facility or health worker visiting you/ talking to
you besides informing the State and District Surveillance Officer.
• An identified care giver (among family members) will only attend to
you. He / she will wear mask and wash hands, every time he/ she
comes in contact with you.
• Use surgical triple layer mask immediately on realization of symptoms.
• Get admitted to the identified health facility as advised.
• The vehicle/ ambulance which was used for transportation also needs
to be disinfected. (Contact the health facility for the disinfection
procedure).
• Follow infection prevention and control practices at all times and
places.
• If further assistance is required, call Ministry of Health, Government of
India’s Control Room no. +91-11-23978046.
34
C. Advice to other family members at home:
• Wash your hands with soap and water frequently.
• If the person (discharged from the quarantine centre) develops symptoms inform
the health worker and also the State and District Surveillance Officer.
• In case advised to shift the patient to a health facility:
o Share list of all contacts till date with the treating doctor/ health care
worker and the State and District Surveillance
o Family members to be in home quarantine till either medical examination
rules out novel coronavirus infection or the result
of sample is negative.
o Proper disinfection of bedding/ clothing/ room/ all personal belongings
should be followed with 1% Sodium hypochlorite solution.
35
CHECKLIST FOR ESTABLISHING A QUARANTINE CENTER
I. Basic Information:
1) Name of the Quarantine Centre_
2) Address: _
3) Officer In charge:_
4) Email address:
5) Phone Number: _
6) GPS Coordinates:_
II. Location of quarantine centre
7) Located away from the residential area?
Yes No
8) Distance to nearby residential area?
9) Away from an area where gathering expected (Eg: Temples, stadiums, Churches
etc):
Yes No
III. Accessibility to the quarantine centre :
10) How far is it from the nearby airport?
11) How far is from the nearest railway station?
12) How far is the nearest bus station?
13) Is the road to quarantine centre is free from heavy traffic?
14) Is the road to quarantine centre is wide enough to have two vehicles at a time?
Yes No
15) How far is the nearest tertiary care centre?
16) How far is the nearest District Hospital?
IV. Facilities & basic amenities at quarantine facility:
17) How many floors are there in the quarantine building?
18) How many rooms available at the quarantine facility?
19) How many numbers of beds in each room at quarantine facility?
36
20) What is the distance between beds in the quarantine room?
21) Is there is 24*7 supply of electricity at the facility?
Yes No
22) Is there 24*7 supply of water at the facility?
Yes No
23) Is there air conditioning available?
Yes No
24) If yes, it is by centralised AC or individual air conditioning in each room?
i. If individual AC ? a: Split b: Window
25) Does window space covers at least 10% of total area?
Yes No
26) How many windows in each room?
27) Is there exhaust fans in each room?
Yes No
i. If Yes, how much air exchange rate expressed in cubic feet per minute
(CFM)?
28) Is there drainage facility available in each floor? ?
Yes No
29) Is there any separate sewage line from Quarantine areas?
30) Are there separate exit & entry points?
Yes No
31) Is there availability of 24*7 security services at the quarantine area?
32) Is there any separate door for entry of non-health professionals for
housekeeping, catering?
33)
Yes No
34) Is there any separate washroom facility for each room at the facility?
Yes
No
35) If not, how many wash rooms per person/area?
36) Are the floors washable & easily dried?
Yes No
37) Is the floor mappable?
Yes No
38) Is there any in-house mess facility available at quarantine area?
39) Is there any separate room/ resting facility for?
i. Doctors
ii. Nurses
iii. Paramedics
iv. Cleaning staffs
V. Linen management
40) What is the Frequency of changing linen in Quarantine rooms?
41) Whether disposable of Linen used?
Yes No
i. If No then, How they are disinfecting & cleaning linen?
ii. How frequently linens changed?
37
42) Is there any curtains available in the quarantine rooms/wards?
Yes
No
i. If yes frequency of changing them?
ii. frequency of disinfecting & cleaning?
43) Is there any policy for disinfecting mattress at quarantine facility?
Yes
No
44) Is there any written policy for disinfecting beds at quarantine centres?
Yes No
45) If yes, please verify policy and elaborate /
VI. Infection control practices
46) Is adequate PPE supply available at the quarantine facility?
Yes
No
47) Is there adequate supply of disinfectants at the centre?
Yes
No
48) Are the staffs in the facility trained in wearing PPE?
Yes
No
49) Is there a separate area for donning & doffing PPE?
Yes
No
50) Is there hand washing facility with soap with dispenser / hand sanitizer available
at donning & doffing areas?
Yes No
51) If yes, what type of hand rub dispensers are available? (select all applicable
answers)
i. Pocket bottle
ii. Bottle affixed to trolley/tray
iii. Bottle affixed to bed
iv. Wall dispenser
v. Dispenser located on bedside table/trolley
52) Whether all staff has access to hand rub dispensers? ?
Yes
No
53) Are hand rub dispensers replaced when empty?
i. Always
ii. Intermittently
38
iii. Rarely
iv. Never
v. Not applicable
54) Are posters illustrating handwash technique displayed beside each sink?
Yes No
55) Is there availability of bleaching solution of different strength available?
% of hypochlorite
solution YES NO
1%
5%
10%
56) Is there any policy for rodent & pest control management?
Yes
No
57) If yes, is it being implemented & followed?
Yes No
58) Are the staffs trained in infection control practices?
Yes No
59) Is there a structured curriculum / training module for Infection Control
Practices? ?
Yes No
60) What is the Frequency of cleaning of
i. floors of quarantine rooms/wards
ii. Bathrooms
iii. Ambulatory areas
iv. Resting rooms
v. What is the Frequency of cleaning high touch surfaces like door knobs,
bed rails etc?
61) Is there any separate sample collection area?
Yes No
62) Is there is separate thermometer & BP apparatus available at the quarantine
centre?
Yes No
63) Are there colour coded bags available for BMW management?
64) Is the waste being segregated and disposed as per protocol?
Yes
No
65) Are the sharps being disposed as per protocol?
Yes No
66) How the food waste is being disposed?
39
VII. Recreational facilities
67) Is there provision for mobile phone or internet at the facility?
Yes
No
68) Are the mobiles phone disinfected?
i. If Yes how
ii. How frequently
69) Is there any recreational room / area available?
Yes No
70) Is there any provision for Television or Radio at the quarantine facility?
Yes No
71) Is there a provision of printed reading materials at the facility?
Yes
No
i. If Yes how the materials are disposed off?
VIII. Human resources & logistics
72) Is there a dedicated Infection nurse for the quarantine facility to monitor IPC
activities?
73) Is there is rotational shift for doctors/nurses/paramedics?
i. If Yes, how many shifts?
ii. Doctors in each shift
iii. Nurses in each shift
iv. Cleaning staffs in each shift
74) Is there any pulmonologists/physician available when it is needed?
Yes
No
75) Is there a phlebotomist/ lab technician available when it is needed?
Yes
No
76) Is there any availability of clinical psychologist in quarantine facility?
Yes
No
IX. SOP & policies
77) Is there any guidelines/ inhouse SOP for infection control practices?
Yes
No
40
78) Is there any protocol for limiting the visitors to quarantine area?
Yes
No
79) Is there any written policy for the recreational area? ?
Yes No
80) Biomedical waste management guidelines 2016 & amendments 2019 available?
Yes No
81) Does the quarantine health facility in charge aware of National IPC guidelines for
healthcare facilities 2020?
Yes No
82) Is there any linen policy available?
Yes No
83) Is there any SOP for working of doctors, nurses & paramedics at quarantine
facility?
Yes No
84) Is there any protocol for disinfecting ambulance after transporting patient to
isolation centre?
85) Is there any policy for monitoring health of staffs at quarantine area?
86) Is there enough IEC displayed at the quarantine centre?
X. Transporting Patients to Isolation centre
87) Is there any protocol for transfer of patients to tertiary care/transfer of
symptomatic cases to isolation centre?
88) Is there separate ambulance available for transporting patients to isolation
centre?
Yes No
89) Are the ambulance staff trained in wearing PPE & infection control practices?
90) How far is the Isolation facility from the quarantine centre
41
