Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for stepdown of infection control
precautions and discharging COVID-19 patients
Published 9 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home
COVID-19: guidance for stepdown of infection control precautions within hospitals and discharging COVID-19 patients from hospital to
home settings
Public Health
England
Contents
1. General scope
2. Stopping of COVID-19 isolation and IPC measures if patient staying in hospital
3. Discharge of patients to own home
4. Discharge to a single occupancy room in care facility, including nursing homes and residential homes
5. Specific instructions for ongoing medical needs for severely immunosuppressed patients and those who have received critical care
6. Additional background and measures
1. General scope
This guidance provides advice on appropriate infection prevention and control (
IPC) precautions for COVID-19 patients
recovering or recovered from COVID-19 and remaining in hospital, or being discharged to their own home or residential
care. The NHS Hospital Service Discharge requirementsissued in response to the COVID-19 emergency concerns all
hospital discharges.
It is important to note that patientscan and should be discharged before resolution of symptoms provided they are
deemed clinically fit for discharge in a rapid, but safe, manner.
In general, persons with COVID-19 who are admitted to hospital will have more severe disease than those COVID-19
patients who can remain in the community, especially if they require critical care. In addition, they are more likely to have
pre-existing conditions such as severe immunosuppression. In healthcare settings, there also are considerable numbers of
immunocompromised and vulnerable patients.
Therefore, a precautionary approach with more stringent rules for ending isolation and infection control precautions is
recommended for hospitalised patients, notably 14 days for those in critical care and/or immunosuppressed, compared to
the 7-day since symptom onset rule applied to those managed in the community.
The main measures are detailed below.
2. Stopping of COVID-19 isolation and IPC measures if patient staying in
hospital
After 14 days following a positive SARS-CoV-2 test,IPC measures for hospitalised COVID-19 patients can be stopped if
there is:
clinical improvement with at least some respiratory recovery
absence of fever (> 37.8°C) for 48 hours
no underlying severe immunosuppression
If testing for viral clearance is available, it should focus on:
the severely immunocompromised patients to support the optimal use of side rooms, or where side rooms are not
available
any testing that optimises patient flow through the hospital, such as:
long-stay patients who are unable to otherwise be discharged
those being discharged to a household where an extremely vulnerable person is being shielded
3. Discharge of patients to own home
This can be done when the patient’s clinical status is appropriate for discharge, for example, once assessed to have stable
or recovering respiratory function, and any ongoing care needs can be met at home. They should be given clear safety-
netting advice for what to do if their symptoms worsen.
Discharged patients should follow theStay at Home guidance for households with COVID-19 patients:
if they required critical care or they areseverely immunocompromised, they should complete their self-isolation until 14
days from their first positive test
patients who did not require critical care and are not immunosuppressed should complete their self-isolation until 7
days from their first positive test
For all discharged patients, self-isolation at home should continue until their fever has resolved for 48 hours consecutively
without medication to reduce their fever (unless otherwise instructed by their acute care provider – for example, another
reason for persistent fever exists).
Cough may persist in some individuals, and persistent cough is not an indication of ongoing infection when other
symptoms have resolved.
4. Discharge to a single occupancy room in care facility, including nursing
homes and residential homes
7. Severe immunosuppression definitions
8. How to transfer patients home
Discharged patients should follow thecare home guidance for settings with COVID-19 patients.
5. Specific instructions for ongoing medical needs for severely
immunosuppressed patients and those who have received critical care
For those who received critical care, if there has been no virological evidence of clearance prior to discharge and ongoing
medical attendances are required for their underlying condition (such as outpatient follow-up appointments), appropriate
IPC measures should be used for all medical attendances for 14 days following the first positive test result.
For severely immunosuppressed patients, IPC measures should be continued unless either there has been virological
evidence of clearance prior to discharge or there has been complete resolution of all symptoms – this is different to other
advice sections but reflects the complex health needs of such patients and likelihood for prolonged shedding, with risk of
spread in healthcare settings. Such patients may be retested at first follow-up appointment to help inform actions at any
next medical appointment.
6. Additional background and measures
6.1 Inpatient stepdown of IPC in hospitalised patients
IPC measures should continue for COVID-19 patients until 14 days have elapsed since their first positive SARS-CoV-2
test (this differs from community settings, where symptom onset is used). This is due to uncertainties about the duration of
infectiousness for patients with more severe illness or underlying immune problems that may delay them clearing the virus.
If SARS-CoV-2 testing is not available or has not been done, then isolation periods for hospitalised patients with
presumed COVID-19 should be measured from the day of admission.
Before control measures are stepped down for COVID-19, clinical teams must first consider the patient’s ongoing need for
transmission based precautions (TBPs) necessary for any other alert organisms (for example,MRSA carriage or C. difficile
infection), or patients with ongoing diarrhoea.
One negative test is acceptable for stepdown. If repeat testing remains positive after 14 days, and only if local testing
capacity allows, patient samples should be tested after a further 7 days if the patient remains in hospital, or at intervals of 2
weeks in the community (for example, at repeat hospital appointments).
If the patient is producing sputum or is intubated, a lower respiratory tract sample should be preferentially tested (rather
than upper respiratory tract samples), as SARS-CoV-2 can be present in the lower respiratory tract despite being
undetectable in the upper respiratory tract.
It may be operationally easier to cohort all COVID-19 patients in a ward area throughout their inpatient stay. In these
areas, staff should maintain appropriate staff personal protective equipment (PPE) and recommended IPC measures.
6.2 Other household members in an individual’s home setting
if the discharged patient is returning to a shared household, other household members should complete their 14-day
stay at home period (as described in Stay at Home guidance). If this did not start before the patient was admitted to
hospital, then it should start from the day the patient returns to the household, unless the patient has already completed
their appropriate period of isolation within hospital
if there are any vulnerable individuals staying in the household who themselves are not currently infected, ensure that
the discharged patient is advised on strict infection prevention and control measures as outlined in the Stay at Home
guidance for vulnerable individuals
if extremely vulnerable individuals live at their home, as outlined in theguidance on shielding, it is highly advisable for
patients to be discharged to a different home until they have finished their self-isolation period or have laboratory
confirmation of viral clearance
6.3 Ongoing medical needs for discharged patients within their isolation period
Should any patient deteriorate following discharge, either at home or in a care setting, they or their carer should seek
advice from NHS 111 online or by telephone, or through pre-existing services such as specialistGP practice links with care
homes. In an emergency, they or their carer should call 999 for assistance. In either case, they should inform the call
attendant that they have been recently discharged from hospital with confirmed COVID-19.
If there are professional care needs at the patient’s own home, visiting carers should follow the appropriate
PPE
precautions outlined in the home care guidance. Such care staff do not need to follow any other precautions apart from
routine social distancing measures in their own personal life.
Once they have completed their 7 or 14 day isolation period, care workers in residential settings or patient homes should
revert to their own routine guidance documents.
6.4 Specific instructions for ongoing medical needs for severely immunosuppressed patients and
those who have received critical care
Isolation is longer for severely immunosuppressed individuals and those who have received critical care, as there are
uncertainties about the duration of infectiousness for patients with more severe illness and, in particular, underlying
immune problems that may delay them clearing the virus.
For those who received critical care, if there has been no virological evidence of clearance prior to discharge and ongoing
medical attendances are required for their underlying condition (such as outpatient follow-up appointments), appropriate
IPC measures should be used for all medical attendances for patients for 14 days since the first positive test result.
Where possible taking into account local laboratory capacity,testing for virological clearance is encouraged inseverely
immunosuppressed patients. For these patients,IPC measures should be continued unless either there has been
virological evidence of clearance prior to discharge or there has been complete resolution of all symptoms. This is different
to other advice sections but reflects the complex health needs of such patients and likelihood for prolonged shedding, with
risk of spread in healthcare settings. Such patients may be retested at first follow-up appointment to help inform actions at
any next medical appointment.
7. Severe immunosuppression definitions
Severe immunosuppression is defined in theGreen Book on Immunisation as:
immunosuppression due to acute and chronic leukaemias and lymphoma (including Hodgkin’s lymphoma)
severe immunosuppression due to HIV/AIDS
cellular immune deficiencies (such as severe combined immunodeficiency, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, 22q11
deficiency/DiGeorge syndrome)
being under follow up for a chronic lymphoproliferative disorder including haematological malignancies such as indolent
lymphoma, chronic lymphoid leukaemia, myeloma and other plasma cell dyscrasias
having received an allogenic (cells from a donor) stem cell transplant in the past 24 months and only then if they are
demonstrated not to have ongoing immunosuppression or graft versus host disease (GVHD)
having received an autologous (using their own stem cells) haematopoietic stem cell transplant in the past 24 months
and only then if they are in remission those who are receiving, or have received in the past 6 months,
immunosuppressive chemotherapy or radiotherapy for malignant disease or non-malignant disorders
those who are receiving, or have received in the past 6 months, immunosuppressive therapy for a solid organ
transplant (with exceptions, depending upon the type of transplant and the immune status of the patient)
those who are receiving or have received in the past 12 months immunosuppressive biological therapy (such as
monoclonal antibodies), unless otherwise directed by a specialist
those who are receiving or have received in the past 3 months immunosuppressive therapy including:
adults and children on high-dose corticosteroids (>40mg prednisolone per day or 2mg/ kg/day in children under 20kg)
for more than 1 week
adults and children on lower dose corticosteroids (>20mg prednisolone per day or 1mg/kg/day in children under 20kg)
for more than 14 days
adults on non-biological oral immune modulating drugs, for example, methotrexate >25mg per week, azathioprine
>3.0mg/kg/day or 6-mercaptopurine >1.5mg/kg/day
children on high doses of non-biological oral immune modulating drugs
8. How to transfer patients home
See Section 8.3 of the recentNHS Hospital Service Discharge requirementsissued in response to the COVID-19
emergency that concerns all hospital discharges.
Transport home can be arranged via a variety of routes; if the patient has their own car at the hospital, and is well enough,
they may drive home.
If they are taking shared transport, the need for further isolation of discharged patients with COVID-19 who have not
completed their 7 or 14 day isolation period and who do not have virological evidence of clearance, should be
communicated with transport staff (for example, ambulance crews and relatives). Those transporting them should not
themselves be at greater risk of severe infection.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
There is detailed NHSE patient transport guidanceavailable for acute care settings to use. If isolation is to continue in a
residential setting, the following guidelines apply to all methods of transport:
the patient should be given clear instructions on what to do when they leave the ward to minimise risk of exposure to
staff, patients and visitors on their way to their transport
the patient should wear a surgical facemask for the duration of the journey, and advised that this should be left on for
the entire time if tolerated (not pulled up and down)
the patient should sit in the back of the vehicle with as much distance from the driver as possible (for example, the back
row of a multiple passenger vehicle)
where possible use vehicles that allow for optimal implementation of social distancing measures, such as those that
have a partition between the driver and the passenger or larger vehicles that allow for a greater distance between the
driver and the passenger
vehicle windows should be (at least partially) open to facilitate a continuous flow of air
vehicles should be cleaned appropriately at the end of the journey
ensure the patient has a supply of tissues and a waste bag for disposal for the duration of the journey; the waste bag
should then be taken into their house and held for a period of 72 hours before disposal with general household waste
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
