Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
COVID-19: which samples should be taken (text
version of poster)
Updated 3 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: guidance for sampling and for diagnostic laboratories
Public Health
England
1. Scope
This guidance explains and supplements the information presented visually in the posterCOVID-19: which samples
should be taken.
2. Specimens
Contents
1. Scope
2. Specimens
3. Packaging
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Upper respiratory tract sample options:
combined nose and throat swab in one collection tube containing universal transport medium OR
single swab used for throat then nose OR
individual nose and throat swabs in separate collection tubes OR
nasopharyngeal aspirate in a universal transport pot
Lower respiratory tract sample in universal container (sputum) if obtainable
If the patient is admitted, take a sample for acute serology:
5mL in either serum tube or plain (no additive) tube. For children <12 years, 1mL is acceptable
3. Packaging
For packaging guidance, see posterSuspected COVID-19 cases: sampling and packaging poster.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
