HIGHLIGHTS
• On the 5th of April 2020, 102 new cases of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 were announced by the Ministry of Public Health of
Thailand, bringing the total number of cases to 2,169.
• Of the newly reported cases, 14 cases were identified in people
entering or returning to Thailand, highlighting the need for strict
compliance with quarantine requirements. The Thai Government has
announced that between now and 15 April, Thailand will take steps to
reduce the number of people entering the country.
• A total of 44 of the new cases are close contacts of previously
confirmed cases, highlighting the need for strict adherence with social
distancing in all settings. Cases are also still being reported in individuals whose work brings them into
contact with large numbers of people, suggesting that further social distancing restrictions may be required.
• 66 of 77 provinces have now reported laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19. Approximately half of the
cases to date have occurred in Bangkok (1,011 cases) and half have been detected in other provinces.
• 37 healthcare workers have been infected to date. To protect our healthcare workers and health system, it
is essential that all of us remain inside our homes as much as possible, maintain a distance of at least 1.5
meters from other persons, wash our hands frequently and comply with the Thai government request for all
persons to wear cloth face masks when in public spaces.
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health
THAILAND SITUATION
in the last 24 hours
2,169 confirmed (102 new)
23 deaths (3 new)
1,472 people hospitalized
37 healthcare staff infected (2
new)
23 severe cases
674 recovered
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 5 April 2020
UPDATES FROM THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH IN THAILAND
ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
• In collaboration with all public and private hospitals, a total of 1,622 beds are reserved for COVID-19
patients in Bangkok and the municipality, with additional 510 beds from the travel sector.
• Tomorrow there will be a meeting among experts to assess current treatment guidelines.
• The Ministry of Public Health will ensure the availability of Favipiravir through procurement of the drug
from Japan (100,000 pills) and China (100,000 pills).
• The Government Pharmaceutical Organization is managing central stock, and drugs will be distributed to
all hospitals across Thailand through 4 nodes: Bangkok areas, Department of Disease Control, 12 health
service regions and university hospitals in the provinces.
• The Ministry of Public Health has taken the following measures to strengthen capacity in anticipation of a
surge of COVID patients:
o Preparation of Acute Respiratory Infection clinics in all hospitals.
o Defining the roles of different categories of health facilities.
o Integration of all experts and members of the workforce for epidemic response.
o Reserving necessary medicines and medical supplies.
• Remain inside your home. Leave your home only for essential activities (e.g. medical care, purchase food).
• Always try to maintain a distance of at least 1.5 meters from all other persons
• Wear a cloth face mask when in public. Do not use N95 masks- they are needed for healthcare workers.
• Wash your hands frequently. An alcohol-based hand rub is also effective
• Do not touch your eyes, nose or mouth.
WHAT WHO IS DOING TO PROVIDE SUPPORT TO THAILAND
WHO Thailand remains in frequent direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry of Public
Health, sharing information on key developments, guidelines and scientific updates.
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides information and advice to staff of the UN system in
Thailand.
MEDIA
WHO Thailand’s website, Twitter and Facebook accounts, regularly provide content on all aspects of the
outbreak in Thailand and around the world. Media queries can be directed to sethawebmaster@who.int and
kanpirom@who.int
USEFUL LINKS
• The Thailand COVID19 situation report is available in Thai and English at http://covid19.th-stat.com/en.
• For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, please visit www.who.int/thailand
• For global figures and technical advice from WHO please visit.
One of the key measures in preventing the spread of
COVID-19 is to follow good respiratory hygiene.
This means covering your mouth and nose with your bent
elbow or a tissue when you cough or sneeze. Then dispose of
the used tissue immediately.
Droplets spread the virus. By following good respiratory
hygiene, you protect the people around you from viruses such
as cold, flu and COVID-19.
Watch our video to learn what you can do to protect yourself
and others from getting the new coronavirus.
