Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Coronavirus (COVID-19): providing unpaid care to
adults with learning disabilities and autistic adults
Published 24 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home COVID-19: providing unpaid care to adults with learning disabilities and autistic adults
Department
of Health &
Social Care
Who this guidance is for
This guidance is for those who provide unpaid care, such as friends or family, to adults with learning disabilities and
Contents
Who this guidance is for
Protecting yourself and the person you care for
Supporting the person through change
Maintaining your own health and wellbeing
autistic adults.
This guidance aims to help those with caring responsibilities keep people with learning disabilities and autistic people safe,
to support them to understand the changes they need to make during the COVID-19 outbreak, and to protect their own
wellbeing.
The outbreak and the measures that have been put in place will have an impact on everyone’s lives and may result in
increased stress and anxiety for both carers and the people they look after, as routines and care provision change. This
may be heightened for people with learning disabilities and autistic people and it is important to continue to consider their
unique needs and preferences. All care and support should continue to be given in the least restrictive way possible and
continue to maximise independence wherever possible.
This guidance builds on the guidance for those who provide unpaid care to friends or familyand more detailed guidance
published by the Social Care Institute for Excellence (SCIE), which will continue to be updated with resources to support
those who care for people with learning disabilities and autistic people.
The advice and resources may also be helpful for those supporting people with other needs relating to a cognitive
impairment, such as dementia or mental health conditions.
Protecting yourself and the person you care for
Maintaining good hygiene practices
Keep up to date with announcements and advice on GOV.UK and follow the latest advice set out in the
guidance on social
distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and vulnerable adults, which includes tips on how to help
protect a vulnerable person you live with.
Cleaning your hands frequently throughout the day by washing with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or using hand
sanitiser is one of the most effective ways of reducing the risk of infection for you and other people. This includes when
you arrive at the home of the person you care for, if you do not live with them, or have been out.
The stay at home guidance provides information on washing your hands, cleaning and disposing of waste, and cleaning
laundry, as well as other information for those living with a vulnerable person. You should also refer to the guidance on
hygiene on the NHS website.
Planning in case of an emergency
As set out in theguidance for those who provide unpaid care to friends or family
, we advise all carers to create an
emergency plan with the person they care for, to use in circumstances where other people may need to help deliver care.
Depending on the circumstances, this could be help from family or friends, or a care provider.
In order to create an emergency plan that fits the needs of the person you care for, you will need to set out:
the name and address and any other contact details of the person you look after
who you and the person you look after would like to be contacted in an emergency
details of any medication the person you look after is taking
details of any ongoing treatment they need
details of any medical appointments they need to keep
details of their preferences and usual routine
You should also ensure that it is in a format that can readily be shared with other people who will need to discuss the plan
with the person you care for.
For more support on contingency planning, seeCarers UK guidance on practical support and planning in an emergency,
including information about local carer organisations. You can also find information out about local services on the Carers
Trust website.
Collecting prescriptions if you are self-isolating
If you normally collect prescriptions for the person you care for, you will not be able to do this if you are self-isolating. Most
pharmacies provide a home delivery service. Telephone them to see if this is available or if there is another scheme
running locally to help you access prescriptions.
Pharmacy delivery services will be under pressure at the moment, so it is important that you order your repeat
prescriptions in good time, to avoid delays in dispensing. Information on repeat prescriptions and delivery services may
also be available via your GP practice website.
If the person you care for is concerned about their usual paid carer coming in and out of their home
The government has issued guidance to home care providers to ensure that appropriate levels of hygiene are achieved to
reduce the risk of infection. Speak to the care provider about the processes they are following to maintain good hygiene.
If the person you care for receives regular health or social care from an organisation, either through yourlocal authority or
paid for by themselves, inform their care provider that they are reducing social contacts and agree on a plan for continuing
their care, identifying essential care tasks that should continue.
As a carer, the guidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and vulnerable adults
provides advice on the extra precautions you can take to help keep the person you care for safe.
If the person you care for is in a care home
If you have no symptoms, you should keep in contact with the care home to understand any local arrangement to keep in
touch with residents and follow the guidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and
vulnerable adults. This guidance includes tips on how to maintain contact with relatives or friends such as staying in touch
via phone or post where you are unable, or it is not advisable, to visit.
Caring for someone who is clinically ‘extremely vulnerable’ (shielding)
Some people with learning disabilities or autistic people may have a specific health condition and may be clinically defined
as ‘extremely vulnerable’. The guidance on shielding and protecting the clinically extremely vulnerableand the guidance
for those who provide unpaid care to friends or family provides detailed advice on how to care for someone who falls into
this category.
The NHS in England is directly contacting people with these conditions to provide further advice. If you think the person
you care for falls into the clinically ‘extremely vulnerable’ group and they have not received a letter or been contacted by
their GP, you should discuss your concerns with their GP.
If you are clinically ‘extremely vulnerable’
If you are in the group clinically defined as ‘extremely vulnerable’, you should follow the measures set out in the
guidance
for clinically extremely vulnerable groups. The advice should still be followed even if you do not have symptoms.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19
If you or someone in your household has symptoms, you should follow thestay at home guidance. The guidance provides
detailed advice on when and how to self-isolate and information on cleaning and hygiene.
However, we appreciate that the advice above may not be easy to achieve where you provide close contact care for a
spouse or relative such as washing and bathing. Where possible and needed, ask friends and family who can support you
in providing care, or find out about local carer organisations at Carers UK or through yourlocal authority
You should also review theguidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and
vulnerable adults for information about those people who are considered at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-
19. These people are not being advised to follow the guidance for clinically extremely vulnerable groups, but should be
particularly stringent in complying with social distancing guidance.
If the person you care for has symptoms of COVID-19
If the person being cared for has symptoms or is part of a household that is isolating, you must follow the advice set out in
the stay at home guidance and the Guidance for those who provide unpaid care to friends or family
.
If you do not live in the same home as the person you care for, you should provide information on who the person should
call if they feel unwell, how to use the NHS 111 online coronavirus service and leave the number for NHS 111 prominently
displayed.
Supporting the person through change
Communication
Changes in routines and care can be particularly stressful for people with learning disabilities and autistic people, and it is
important that accessible information is provided to support them to understand the outbreak and the measures
introduced. You may also need to consider how to manage behaviour that challenges, particularly if usual techniques are
not appropriate or possible during the outbreak.
There are some steps you can take and guidance you can follow to support the person you care for through change:
Try to explain in simple and familiar terms why things are changing, emphasising what will remain normal and how long
change will likely last for.
Consider where you can support them to continue doing what they enjoy and that can support their wellbeing. The
guidance on mental health and wellbeing offers examples of activities that can be done at home.
The Challenging Behaviour Foundation has helpful resources, including a visual summary ofwhat to do if the behaviour
of the person you support changes and begins to challenge.
It is important to use resources which are accessible and can best explain the outbreak and latest guidance to the person,
such as:
easy read overview of COVID-19
easy read explanation of social distancing
easy read overview of shielding the clinically ‘extremely vulnerable’
MENCAP resources
World Health Organization guide to effective hand-washing
Music video made by people with learning disabilities to support effective handwashing
Social distancing
The guidance on social distancing sets out the restrictions in place during the COVID-19 outbreak and the reasons for
which you can leave your home.
It is important that the person you care for understands why it is important to maintain a social distance, and what may
happen if they do not. An easy read explanation of the current guidance is available.
However, if the person in your care has a specific health condition which requires them to leave their home to maintain
good health – including if that involves reasonable specific travel beyond your local area – then they can do so. This could,
for example, include where people with learning disabilities or autistic people require specific exercise in an open space 2
or 3 times each day – ideally in line with a care plan agreed with a medical professional.
Wherever possible, you should support the person to continue their usual activities outside, in line with the
guidance on
social distancing. If it is not possible to continue their usual activities outside, alternative arrangements should be
considered. These may include accessing online services such as food delivery or online prescription orders.
You may be able to access help fromCOVID-19 Mutual Aid UK which provides voluntary support to those who are in
need. You may want to approach your local authority, who are strategically supporting these groups, so you can access
safe, appropriate support.
Coping with bereavement
It is possible that the person you care for may experience the death of someone they know during this period or may
experience anxiety at deaths reported in the media. In this instance, it is important to have open and honest discussions
about death and coping with the person you care for.
The links below provide accessible resources to support communicating death to people with learning disabilities and
autistic people:
NHS advice on coping with bereavement
Beyond Words guide for when someone dies from coronavirus
CWP NHS Trust bereavement guide for carers
MENCAP guide to dealing with bereavement
Maintaining your own health and wellbeing
It is important that you look after your own health and wellbeing as well as supporting others you care for, especially given
the potential for additional stresses at the current time and the potential for reduced access to support such as respite
care.
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
The UK has left the EU
Transition period: get ready for 2021
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
There is information in thestay at home guidance and the guidance on social distancing about looking after your
wellbeing, as well as more detailed guidance on self-care and sources of support for mental health and wellbeing during
the outbreak.
Tips include taking care of your mind as well as your body and getting support if you need it. Daily physical activity is
important for many aspects of health and wellbeing, including managing stress, encouraging positive feelings, and
promoting good sleep habits. The One You website has suggestions for exercises you can do at home.
Draw on support you might have through your friends, family and other networks during this time. Try to stay in touch with
those around you over the phone, by post, or online. Let people know how you would like to stay in touch and build that
into your routine.
Remember it is ok to share your concerns with others you trust and in doing so you may be able to provide support to
them too. There are sources of support and information that can help, such as NHS recommended helplines, and the
Every Mind Matters website.
It may also be helpful to contact your local carers support organisation who can help with contingency planning. You can
find out about local carer organisations at Carers UK. There is also an online forum on Carers UK.
Accessing alternative care quickly if you are unable to provide care
Having to organise alternative care can be difficult and concerning. Where possible, you should contact friends and family
who may be able to give immediate help in providing care. You should follow the guidelines set out in the stay at home
guidance and the Guidance on social distancing for everyone in the UK and protecting older people and vulnerable adults
to protect those coming into the home of the person who needs care.
If you cannot organise alternative care you can contact yourlocal authority or health care provider.
If you do not know how to do this, you can contact NHS 111.
If you need time off work to care for a relative who has symptoms or is self-isolating
You should talk to your employer about your caring needs and what arrangements can be put in place. Information
regarding statutory sick pay entitlements can be found in the guidance for employees.
Some people may be entitled to benefits as a carer, such asCarer’s Allowance.
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
