Advisory on use of Homemade Protective Cover for
Face & Mouth
1. We are aware that social distancing and personal hygiene are
keys to prevent COVID 19 infections. Certain countries have
claimed benefits of homemade face cover for the general public.
Such homemade face cover is a good method for maintaining
personal hygiene. Such usage certainly will help in maintaining
overall hygienic health conditions.
2. Therefore, it is suggested that such people who are not suffering
from medical conditions or having breathing difficulties may use
the handmade reusable face cover, particularly when they step
out of their house. This will help in protecting the community at
large.
3. This face cover is not recommended for either health workers or
those working with or in contact with COVID 19 patients or are
patients themselves as these categories of people are required
to wear specified protective gear.
4. It is advised that two sets of such face covers be made so that
one can be washed while the other is used. Hand washing would
still remain essential criteria and hand should be washed before
wearing the face cover. Such face covers should also not be
thrown anywhere but kept safely, washed properly with soap and
hot water and dried properly before they are used.
5. These face covers could be made out of clean cloth available at
home, which needs to be thoroughly cleaned and washed before
a face cover is stitched/made. The face cover should be
prepared in such a manner that it can cover the mouth and nose
completely and can be tied over the face easily.
6. There must not be a sharing of face covers and a face cover
must be used by only one individual. So, in a family of several
members, each member should have a separate face cover.
* * * * *
Issued by the Ofﬁce of the Principal
Scientiﬁc Advisor to the Government
of India_ April 3, 2020
Face Covers for Curbing
the Spread of SARS-CoV-2
Coronavirus
Illustration by MoHFW
Manual on Homemade Protective Cover
for Face and Mouth.
Annexure
Proposed guide is meant to provide a simple outline of best
practices to make, use and reuse face covers to enable NGOs
and individuals to make face protection themselves.
The key criteria for proposed designs are Ease of Access to
Materials, Ease of Making at Home, Ease of Use and Reuse.
The homemade face cover should be prepared in such a manner
that it can cover the mouth and nose completely and can be tied
over the face easily.
This face cover is not recommended for either health workers
or those working with or in contact with COVID 19 patients or
are patients themselves as these categories of people are
required to wear specified protective gear.
Wearing of face covers is especially recommended
for people living in densely populated areas
across India.
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_2
1.a Cutting Fabric– Cut cloth for the face cover at the
following sizes as required:
1.b Cutting Strips– Cut 4 strips for tying and piping
from cloth: Two pieces at 1.5”x 5” and Two pieces at 1.5”x 40”
Adult: 9 inch x 7 inch Child: 7 inch x 5 inch
Begin
with
Option 1. Make a Face Cover using a Sewing Machine
Things you will need:
You can easily make a face cover at
home to protect yourself.
100% cotton material
Four pieces of cloth strips Scissors
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
8
inch
Illustration by MoHFW
Any used cotton cloth can be used to make this face cover. The
colour of the fabric does NOT matter but you must ensure that you
wash the fabric well in boiling water for 5 minutes and dry it well
before making the face cover. Adding salt to this water is
recommended.
1.
2. 3. 4.
Sewing Machine
Inch(“)=2.5cms
For Adult Size
Face Cover 
*
*You can also make this face cover without a sewing machine
Take the cut fabric, attach the 1.5x5” strip to be used as piping to the fabric on one end as shown.
Create three downward facing pleats of approximately 1.5” each folding cloth as shown.
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_4
Turn the pleated cloth to the other side and repeat steps for pleating on this side as shown above.
Once the pleats have been made, the height of the pleated cloth will be reduced from 9” to 5”.
1. 2. 3.
4. 5. 6.
7. 8. 9.
Process demonstrated below is for Adult Size Face Cover
Secure the pleats with piping on both sides as shown above. Take extra care to keep all pleats facing
downward as shown.
10. 11. 12.
Now begin attaching the long 40” strips used for tying the face cover to the top and bottom as shown.
13. 14. 15.
Once again fold both these strips three times and stitch as shown above.
16. 17. 18.
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_5
Your face cover is now ready
Ensure that the face cover fits
around your mouth and nose
and there is no gap between
it and your face. When wearing
the face cover, the side facing
you should show the pleats as
facing downwards.
You must never reverse the
face cover for reuse. Always
thoroughly wash it after
every use following process
shown further.
This face cover is currently being used by
community health workers of organizations in South
Rajasthan including, Amrit Clinic, Arth Hospital,
and Shreyas Hospital. Images and process
courtesy: Jatan Sansthan, Udaipur
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_6
Make sure the face cover fits your face well
and there are no gaps on the sides...
1. 2. 3.
4. 5.
7. 8.
6.
Remember to still maintain
up to 2 meter distance from
others at all times, wash your
hands thoroughly when back
home and do not touch your
face or eyes!
Demonstrated by Dr. Gargi Goel, Pediatrician, Rajasthan
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_7
DRAFT ONLY
DRAFT ONLY
Option 2: Making a Face Cover at Home Without
a Sewing Machine
Step 2 Step 3
Fold the handkerchief from one
side to little above the middle of
the cloth
Now fold over the other edge
to go above the first fold
Fold this again evenly from the
middle as shown
Things you will need:
100% Cotton material or a
Men’s cotton handkerchief
Two rubber bands
Step 1
1. 2.
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_8
Step 6
Step 7
Step 4
Step 5
Take a rubber band and tie it on left side of the
cloth as shown
Now tie the other side with another rubber band
Ensure that the area in the middle of the two rubber
bands is big enough to cover your mouth and nose
Take one edge of the cloth on the side of the rubber
band and fold over it. Do this for both sides
Now take one fold and insert in to the other fold
1. Your face cover is now ready
3. To wear this face cover just wrap
each rubber band around your ears
2. Please ensure that the face cover
fits around your mouth and nose
comfortably but that there is no
gap left between the face cover
and the mouth.
4. You must follow all precautions
and instructions outlined above
when using the face cover
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_9
after every single use as shown
Wash and sanitize this mask
in next page...
• Do not touch the front or any other
surface of the face cover, remove
it only with strings behind
• For string face cover, always
untie the string below and then the
string above
• After removal, immediately clean
your hands with 65% alcohol-
based hand sanitizer or with soap
and water for 40 seconds
• Drop it directly into a soap
solution or boiling water to which
salt has been added
IMPORTANT PRECAUTIONS:
1. Thoroughly wash and clean
the face cover (as shown in next page)
before wearing it.
2. Wash your hands thoroughly
before wearing the face cover.
3. As soon as the face cover becomes
damp or humid, switch to another
face cover and clean the used
face cover.
4. Never reuse a face cover after
single use without cleaning it.
5. Never share the face cover with
anyone. Every member in a family
should have separate face cover.
When removing the
face cover:
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_10
Before using the handmade
face cover remember:
How to Clean and Sanitize your
Homemade Face Cover Everyday
1. Thoroughly wash the face cover in soap and warm
water and leave it to dry in hot sun for at least 5 hours.
If you do not have access to the sun, follow Option 2:
2. Place the face cover in water in a pressure cooker and
pressure boil it for at least 10 minutes and leave it
to dry. Adding salt to the water is recommended. In the
absence of a pressure cooker, you may boil the cloth
face cover in hot water for 15 minutes.
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_11
3. Wash and clean with soap and apply heat on the
face cover for up to ﬁve minutes. (You may use an iron).
.
If you do not have access to a pressure cooker/boiling
water, follow Option 3:
It is recommended that you make two face covers so you
can wear one, while the other is washed and dried
2. 3.
5.
1.
4.
Take any plastic bag at home
Keep your extra clean face
cover in this clean bag
Keep it sealed well Now you can rotate your
face covers for daily use
Clean it thoroughly with soap
and water
Let it dry well on both sides
6.
How to Store your Clean Face Cover
Manual on DIY Face Covers_India_12
Images from public sources
Design by Vertiver
Wearing of face covers is particularly useful in crowded areas.
Issued by the Ofﬁce of the Principal
Scientiﬁc Advisor to the Government of
India_ April 3, 2020
Homemade reusable face covers only reduce the chances of
inhaling droplets still in the air from an infected person, they
do not give full protection. Homemade reusable face covers must
be washed and cleaned each day, as instructed. Reuse without
washing should NEVER be done. Never share your face cover
with anyone. Social distancing must still be maintained.
Remember to wash your hands frequently
with soap for 20 seconds.
