HIGHLIGHTS
• In light of the COVID-19 situation on consultationwith States PM announced
the extension of the nationallockdownin India till 3rd May, details here.
• Union Ministerof Health and FamilyWelfare held a video conferencewith
health functionariesand senior officialsas wellas field officers of WHO
SEARO and Country Office on the containmentmeasuresfor COVID-19 in
India, detailsavailable here.
• WHO officers workingat national, state and district level providing technical
coordinationfor the development of Micro-Plansfor clusters and outbreak
containmentwith States/UT officialsand also helpingthem in devising a
strategy for continuedsurveillanceof districts, details available here.
• WHO’s is also supporting Ministryof Health & FamilyWelfare (MoHFW) to
further strengthen the ongoingsurveillance and response based on
transmissionscenarios & testing of cases,details available here.
• A high-level TaskForcehas been formedto work on the frontiers of science
related to drug testing and vaccines. Throughthe TaskForce,the Government
willfurther facilitate, keep track and monitorthe progress of national and
internationalefforts in vaccinedevelopment, details available here.
INDIA SITUATION
• As of 19 April 2020(5:00 PM), accordingto the Ministry of Health & FamilyWelfare (MoHFW), a total of 16 116
COVID-19 cases including (77foreign nationals) in 32 states/union territories. Theseinclude 2301whohave
been cured/discharged,1migrated and 519 deaths. Available here.
SITUATION IN NUMBERS
India
16 116 Confirmed
519 Deaths
32 States/UTs
South-EastAsia
27 319 Confirmed
1185Deaths
Globally
2 241 359 Confirmed
152 551 Deaths
WHO Classification
India - Clusters of cases
WHO GLOBAL UPDATE
• WHO and GlobalCitizen featured inspiringand heartwarmingstories from the frontlines of the COVID-19
response through livestreamed appearancescurated in collaborationwith Lady Gaga, Sir Elton John, Billie
Eilish and others on major socialmedianetworks, streaming services, and majortelevision networks worldwide,
details available here.
• WHO SEARO joineda meeting with WHO India andMoHFW under the leadership of the UnionMinister with
health functionariesand senior officialsas wellas field officers of the World Health Organization (WHO) on the
containmentmeasuresfor COVID-19 in India particularlyinstitutionalizing field support, details available here
WHO COUNTRY UPDATE
WHO Country Office for India (WCO) continuesto work closelywith MoHFW,on preparednessand response
measuresfor COVID-19, includingsurveillanceandcontacttracing, laboratory diagnosis, risk communicationsand
communityengagement,hospital preparedness, infectionprevention and control(IPC) andimplementationof
containmentstrategies.
• Co-ordination and Partnership:WCO continuesto provide technicalsupport to MoHFW through Joint
MonitoringGroupmeetings and discussionsof the EmpoweredGroups.
• Hospital preparedness: WHO field teams are supporting MoHFWstate/district officials to review hospital
preparedness by visiting dedicatedCOVID-19 hospitals as an emergencypreparedness measure, details
available here.
• Laboratorytesting:WHO is providing kits and reagents to COVID-19 testing laboratories through ICMR to
partly meettheir hugetesting requirement.
• Research:ICMR Is working on the “Phase II, OpenLabel, RandomizedControlled Study to Assess the Safety
and Efficacyof Convalescent Plasma to Limit COVID19 Associated Complications”, detailshere.
DG ICMR / Secretary DHR are planningto conducta “COVID-19 sero-prevalence survey in 82 districts in 25
states” with WHO assistance in conducting thesurvey.
• Communityengagement: WHO is supporting MOHFWand partners to undertake a survey to assess the
situation of COVID-19 awareness in urban slumsthrough a participatorysurvey.
• Essential ServiceContinuation:MoHFWsupported by WHO releasedthe guidancenoteon Enabling
Delivery of Essential Health Services during the COVID 19 Outbreak, details available here
ADVICE FORTHE PUBLIC
• For all authentic & updated information on COVID-19 related technical issues, guidelines & advisories please
regularly visit: https://www.mohfw.gov.in/.
• Technical queries related to COVID-19 can be emailed at technicalquery.covid19@gov.in and other queries
on ncov2019@gov.in .
• In case of any queries on COVID-19, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare helpline no.: +91-11-23978046 or
1075 (Toll-free).List of helplinenumbersof States/UTs on COVID-19 available here.
FOR MOREINFORMATION CONTACT
WHO Country Office for India I Telephone number:+91-11-66564800 I Email: wrindia@who.int
