KCDC Advises Caution against
Heat-Related Illnesses as Heat Wave
Continues
Contact: Yoo Hyo-soon, Division of Strategic Planning for
Emerging Infectious Diseases
(043-719-7261, hsyoo@korea.kr)

□

According to the Korea Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, a total of 551 cases have been reported through the
heat-related illness surveillance system from May 20th to July 15
this year, with four deaths. A significant increase in reported
cases was seen in the past four days, with 52% of the total cases
reported during this time.

○ 6,500 cases of heat-related illnesses have been reported over the
past five years, with 40% of these cases reported following
strenuous outdoor activity, such as farming or fieldwork, during
the hours of 12pm-5pm.

As such, the KCDC advises individuals

to refrain from outdoor activity if possible during heat waves.

○ Furthermore,

33% of all cases were reported by individuals who

conducted outdoor activities in the morning hours of 9am-12pm
and the evening hours of 5pm-9pm.

Also, 20% of all cases were

reported by individuals who were indoors, either at home or at
the workplace.

Taking these statistics into consideration, during

heat waves, the KCDC urges individuals to monitor their health
closely throughout the day, even during the morning and evening
hours and even when indoors.

□

○

Heat-related health risks are easily prevented by taking the
appropriate precautions. Individuals are advised to stay
hydrated, refrain from strenuous physical activity, especially
during the hotter times of the day, and to watch out for
symptoms of heat-related illnesses.
During times of extreme heat, it is important to drink fluids
regularly to prevent dehydration.

If you feel the onset of any

related symptoms such as dizziness, headaches, or nausea,
immediately stop what you are doing and find a cool place to
rest.

○

During heat waves, refrain from any outdoor or strenuous
physical activity during the hotter hours of the day (12pm-5pm).
Individuals who must work outside during these hours are
advised to wear wide-brimmed hats and bright, loose-fitting
clothing to protect themselves from the heat.

