Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Coronavirus: travel guidance for educational
settings
Updated 25 March 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Coronavirus (COVID-19): travel advice for educational settings
Department
for Education
Public Health
England
This guidance is for students, staff and children in the education sector planning to travel in the UK or overseas, and for
Contents
1. Travel for children under 18 organised by educational settings
2. Travel for students over 18 and staff organised by educational settings
3. Participants already on Erasmus+ and European Solidarity Corps exchanges
4. Travel insurance
5. More information
those who are already overseas.
1. Travel for children under 18 organised by educational settings
1.1 Overseas trips for children under 18 organised by educational settings
The government advises against any overseas trips for children under 18 organised by educational settings.
From 17 March, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) is advising British nationals against all non-essential
international travel for an initial period of 30 days. The latest guidance on social distancing also recommends avoiding all
non-essential domestic trips and use of public transport, where possible.
1.2 Domestic trips for children under 18 organised by educational settings
The Department for Education is currently advising against domestic trips (residential and non-residential) for children
under 18 organised by educational settings.
1.3 Overseas trips for children under 18 organised by educational settings currently taking place
From 23 March, FCO is advising British people travelling abroad to return to the UK immediately, while commercial routes
are still available.
International travel is becoming very limited as air routes cease, land borders close and new restrictions are put in place
that prevent flights from leaving.
Any overseas trips for children under 18 organised by educational settings currently taking place should arrange for the
trip to end and for participants to return. You will need to take account of the fast-moving situation and plan accordingly,
including the fact there are currently fewer commercial routes available.
While overseas, if someone in the travelling group develops coronavirus (COVID-19) symptoms (a new, continuous cough
or a high temperature over 37.8 degrees), they should seek medical assistance and follow the advice of the local
authorities. They should be ready to comply with local isolation, testing or quarantine requirements, and will need to rely
on the local health system.
Educational settings should refresh their risk assessments and ensure measures are in place and agreed with parents in
case children or adult supervisors exhibit symptoms that require self-isolation.
Whilst overseas, you should be prepared for border closures or lockdown measures being introduced at short notice. You
must follow the advice of local authorities and also follow the latest FCO travel advice.
FCO teams around the world are working urgently to ensure that governments have sensible plans to enable the return of
British and other travellers, and, crucially, to keep borders open for a sufficient period of time to enable returns to take
place on commercial routes, wherever possible. FCO is also working with airlines to ensure as many people as possible
can get commercial flights home.
UK travellers abroad should keep up to date with travel advice for the country/territory they are in.
FCO has published advice for British nationals overseas who do not have immediate departure options available to them.
You should contact your airline, tour operator and travel insurer to find out what support they can offer.
If you are a UK national who needs emergency help from the UK government while overseas as the country you are in will
not allow you to travel back to the UK or there are no commercial travel options available, you can contact the nearest
British embassy, consulate or high commission or the FCO in London on 020 7008 1500 for help or advice 24/7.
Read guidance on what you can do if you need financial helpand who you can contact for support when abroad.
You can subscribe to email alerts for the country or territory you are in via the ‘Get email alerts’ link on each
travel advice
page. You should also consult the latest PHE Public Health matters guidance.
2. Travel for students over 18 and staff organised by educational settings
2.1 Students and staff considering travelling overseas, including to start or continue full courses
From 17 March, the FCO is advising British nationals against all non-essential international travel for an initial period of 30
days. The latest guidance on social distancing also recommends avoiding all non-essential domestic travel and use of
public transport, where possible.
International travel is becoming very limited as air routes cease, land borders close and new restrictions are put in place
that prevent flights from leaving.
You should consult the latest FCOtravel advice before you travel. You can subscribe to email alerts for the
country/territory you are planning to visit, via the ‘Get email alerts’ link on each travel advice page.
Before you travel, read the latest health advice and follow guidance for travellers to reduce your risk of exposure to
coronavirus (COVID-19). You should also consult Public Health England (PHE) Public Health matters guidance before
you travel.
You should be aware that travel advice may change whilst you are overseas. You are advised to regularly check all
relevant GOV.UK guidance, including before you return to the UK.
If you are travelling overseas with, or on behalf of, an educational setting or institution, you should speak to them before
you depart for advice on whether your trip should go ahead.
2.2 UK students and staff already studying or working overseas
All UK students and staff currently studying on exchanges (for example, Erasmus+, or terms abroad) or working
temporarily overseas are advised to return to the UK now, while commercial routes are still available
If UK students currently overseas for longer periods, for example those studying full degrees, are considering returning to
the UK, they should do so while commercial routes are still available.
International travel is becoming very limited as air routes cease, land borders close and new restrictions are put in place
that prevent flights from leaving.
If you are considering returning to the UK, you should contact your airline or travel company now, and keep up-to-date
with FCO travel advice.
While overseas, if you develop coronavirus (COVID-19) symptoms (a new, continuous cough or a high temperature over
37.8 degrees), you should seek medical assistance and follow the advice of the local authorities. You should be ready to
comply with local isolation, testing or quarantine requirements, and will need to rely on the local health system.
FCO teams around the world are working urgently to ensure that governments have sensible plans to enable the return of
British and other travellers, and, crucially, to keep borders open for a sufficient period of time to enable returns to take
place on commercial routes, wherever possible. FCO is also working with airlines to ensure as many people as possible
can get commercial flights home.
UK travellers abroad should keep up to date with travel advice for the country/territory they are in.
FCO has published advice for British nationals who do not have immediate departure options available to them.
FCO is working with airlines to keep routes open and is calling for international action to keep routes open to enable
British people to return home on commercial flights. We are also working around the clock to support those British
travellers who are experiencing difficulties coming back to the UK.
You should continue to monitor thetravel advice issued by the FCO and comply with any coronavirus (COVID-19) control
measures put in place by your host nation.
You should also contact your educational setting to advise them of your plans and they can provide you with the latest
guidance.
If you are a permanent resident overseas and you plan to remain in your country of residence, you should follow the
advice of the local authorities in the country in which you live.
If you intend to return to the UK, you should use appropriate methods of travel. You need to take account of the fast-
moving situation and plan accordingly, including the fact there are currently fewer commercial routes available.
Travellers currently overseas should be prepared for border closures or lockdown measures being introduced at short
notice.
If you are abroad, you must follow the advice of local authorities and also follow the latest FCOtravel advice. You must be
ready to comply with local isolation, testing or quarantine requirements, and will need to rely on the local health system.
You should contact your airline, tour operator and travel insurer to find out what support they can offer.
You can subscribe to FCO email alerts for the country/territory you are in via the ‘Get email alerts’ link on each
travel
advice page. You should also consult the latest PHEPublic Health matters guidance.
If you are a UK national who needs emergency help from the UK government while overseas as the country you are in will
not allow you to travel back to the UK, or there are no commercial travel options available, you can contact the nearest
British embassy, consulate or high commission or the FCO in London on 0207 008 1500 for help or advice 24/7.
Before you travel, read the latest health advice and follow guidance for travellers to reduce your risk of exposure to
coronavirus (COVID-19).
Read guidance on what you can do if you need financial helpand who you can contact for support when abroad.
3. Participants already on Erasmus+ and European Solidarity Corps
exchanges
If you are currently on a placement, you are advised to return to the UK now. From 23 March, FCO is advising British
people travelling abroad to return to the UK immediately, while commercial routes are still available.
International travel is becoming very limited as air routes cease, land borders close and new restrictions are put in place
that prevent flights from leaving.
Contact your provider to let them know of your plans. You will need to take account of the fast-moving situation and plan
accordingly, including the fact there are currently fewer commercial routes available.
While overseas, if you develop coronavirus (COVID-19) symptoms (a new, continuous cough or a high temperature over
37.8 degrees), you should seek medical assistance and follow the advice of the local authorities. You should be ready to
comply with local isolation, testing or quarantine requirements, and will need to rely on the local health system.
Where this travel is funded through the Erasmus+ or European Solidarity Corps programmes, the Force Majeure clause in
your contract may apply. See the National Agency’s website for more information.
If you are a UK participant who needs emergency help from the UK government while overseas as the country you are in
will not allow you to travel back to the UK, or there are no commercial travel options available, you can contact the nearest
British embassy, consulate or high commission or the FCO in London on 0207 008 1500 for help or advice 24/7.
Read guidance on what you can do if you need financial helpand who you can contact for support when abroad.
4. Travel insurance
The Association of British Insurers (ABI) has producedinformation on travel insurance implications following the
coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. If you have any further questions about your cover or would like further reassurance,
you should contact your travel insurance provider.
5. More information
Updates on coronavirus (COVID-19)
Guidance for educational settings
Immigration guidance for individuals affected by travel restrictions associated with coronavirus (COVID-19)
Scotland: advice for educational settings
Wales: advice for educational settings
Ireland advice: for educational settings
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
