Press Release
Distribution

July 27, 2015

Department

Division of International Cooperation

The special Health Ministers video conference of "ASEAN plus
3" for strengthened cooperation in responding to MERS-CoV

A joint statement for cooperative ways to respond to MERS-CoV was
announced at the special video conference.
- The Ministry of Health and Welfare (the Minister is Moon Hyung-pyo) said
that the special MERS video conference was held at 15:30 on July 27 Korean
time among Ministers of Health from "ASEAN plus 3", in order to share details
about the status of MERS-CoV outbreaks in East Asian countries and to come
up with cooperative ways to control and prevent infection.
- Participants in this conference include Ministers and Vice-Ministers of Health
from 10 ASEAN countries* and three East Asian countries of South Korea,
China and Japan; and representatives from the WHO Western Pacific Regional
Office (WPRO) and the WHO South-East Asia Regional Office (SEARO). This
is the first ministerial teleconference which considers the urgency of the
situation following the introduction of MERS-CoV into the Republic of Korea
and the importance of the issue.
- Kwon Deok-cheol, the head of Office for Healthcare Policy under the Ministry
of Health and Welfare, announced details about the progression of the outbreak
in the Republic of Korea and its government's response measures; and recent
reports about MERS-CoV from China, Thailand and Malaysia were shared.
* 10 ASEAN countries: Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar, Laos, Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand, Brunei and
Cambodia

- The member states announced a joint statement which specifies cooperative
ways for strengthening preparedness and response for MERS-CoV, including
the sharing of border quarantine information, contact tracing, and research
cooperation. According to the joint statement, a global experts meeting will be
convened, which is aimed at the sharing of the Republic of Korea's experience
with MERS among countries (See Annex).
- This conference has been held every two years among Ministers of Health
from the ASEAN and three East Asian countries, in order to reinforce healthcare
cooperation, including the sharing of healthcare policies and technologies, and
the coordinated response for infection control. From the sixth conference held in
2014, the Republic of Korea and Vietnam became its co-chairs. In December
2014, the "special Health Ministers conference of the ASEAN and three
countries for responding to Ebola virus" was convened in Bangkok, Thailand
for coordinated response to prevent the spread of the virus around West Africa,
and a joint statement was announced.

※ An outline of ASEAN+3(Association of South-East Asian nations Plus 3)
ㅇ ASEAN+3: This is a forum which functions to enhance East Asian regional
cooperation among 10 ASEAN countries* and three East Asian countries of
South Korea, China and Japan. Since it was launched in 1997, the
ASEAN+3 has worked for greater coordination between countries in every
sector such as politics, national security, economy, society and culture.
* 10 ASEAN countries: Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, the Republic of the Union
of Myanmar, Laos, Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand, Brunei and Cambodia

ㅇ ASEAN+3 Health Ministers Conference: This was launched in 2004 with the aim
of greater cooperation including the sharing of healthcare policies and
technologies, and the coordinated response for infection control, in connection
with the ASEAN+3. A ministerial meeting is convened every two years. The
sixth Health Ministers conference was held in September 2014.
* Since 2014, its co-chairs have been the Republic of Korea and Vietnam.

