Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
WHO Thailand Situation Report – 29 February 2020
Data as reported by the Thai Ministry of Public Health on 29 February 2020

HIGHLIGHTS
•

•

•

•
•

THAILAND SITUATION
IN NUMBERS

On 29th February 2020 the Ministry of Public Health announced one new
total and new cases in
last 24 hours
case of COVID-19, in a 21 year-old Thai male who works in the retail
sector and is reported to have close contact with international tourists. All
of his contacts are reported to have been traced.
42 confirmed (1 new)
The total number of laboratory confirmed COVID-19 cases reported in
1296 persons under
Thailand now stands at 42, of which 28 have recovered and 14 remain in
Investigation / treatment
hospital. Two patients are still severely unwell. The cumulative number of
PUIs stands at 2,798 PUIs; and increase of 361 from yesterday. This
increase is due to a change in the PUI case definition to make it more sensitive. In total, 1,296 PUIs are
currently under treatment/investigation; this number includes people being treated for other conditions who
are no longer suspected of having COVID-19.
The Ministry of Public Health announcement designating COVID-19 as a dangerous communicable disease
is based on provisions in Sections 5 and 6 of the Communicable Disease Act. It was published today in the
Royal Gazette and will take effect on Sunday, 1st March 2020. This gives legal authority to communicable
disease officers to test, treat and quarantine people infected with COVID-19 as well as high risk contacts if
needed.
A team of Veterinarians is planning to import COVID-19 test kits for use in pets, including cats and dogs.
The Ministry of Public Health is also requesting students to consider cancel or postpone gatherings and
rallies as part of broad measures to promote social distancing.
WHO reiterates that health screening and surveillance systems in Thailand – at points of entry into the
country as well as nationwide - are robust and capable of tracking suspected cases quickly, allowing health
authorities to implement protocols to ensure isolation, contact tracing, testing and treatment of symptoms.

Nationality

Imported case

Locally transmitted cases

Total

Chinese

25

0

25

Thai

7
32

10
10

17
42

As of 29 February 2020

RECOMMENDATIONS AND ADVICE FOR THE PUBLIC
The basic principles to reduce the general risk of transmission of acute respiratory infections, including by the
virus causing COVID-19, include the following:
• Avoiding close contact with people suffering from acute respiratory infections.
• Frequent hand-washing, especially after direct contact with ill people or their environment.
• Avoiding unprotected contact with farm or wild animals.
• People with symptoms of acute respiratory infection should practice cough etiquette (maintain distance, cover
coughs and sneezes with disposable tissues or clothing, and wash hands).
• Within healthcare facilities, enhance standard infection prevention and control practices in hospitals, especially
in emergency departments.
WHO does not recommend any specific health measures for travellers. In case of symptoms suggestive of
respiratory illness either during or after travel, travellers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share
their travel history with their healthcare provider.

MEDIA
•
•

WHO Thailand continues to receive media queries about the outbreak, and has revamped its website to
provide relevant content on a regular basis to the public and other constituencies. Media queries can be
directed to sethawebmaster@who.int or kanpirom@who.int
WHO Thailand’s Twitter and Facebook accounts post useful information on hygiene and protection, such
as when and how to use masks, as well as relevant WHO technical guidelines and other content related to
the novel coronavirus situation in Thailand and globally.

WHO THAILAND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
WHO Thailand’s strategic objectives to support Thailand’s response are to:
•
•
•
•
•

Limit human-to-human transmission including reducing secondary infections among close contacts and
health care workers, preventing transmission amplification events, and preventing further spread within
as well as to and from Thailand i;
Identify, isolate and care for patients early, including providing optimized care for infected patients;
Address crucial unknowns regarding clinical severity, extent of transmission and infection, treatment
options, and accelerate the development of diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines;
Communicate critical risk and event information to all communities and counter misinformation; and
Minimize social and economic impact through multisectoral partnerships.

PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
What Thailand is doing
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Thailand has strong capacities for case detection, risk assessment, case investigation, laboratory diagnosis,
clinical management, infection prevention and control, and risk communication.
Thailand also recently updated its dedicated national pandemic influenza preparedness plan (currently
pending approval by the Prime Minister’s Cabinet).
With WHO support, the National Institute of Health of Thailand is supporting specimen testing for other
countries as requested.
The Health Ministry is conducting modelling exercises with the National Research Council of Thailand to
forecast possible scenarios and outcomes as the outbreak evolves in Thailand.
Visitors to Thailand who have recently been to affected areas are being provided information upon arrival
by the Ministry of Public Health, including how to report any possible illness to the Department of Disease
Control using the 1422 hotline.
The Ministry has also introduced a self-reporting online tool, available in Thai, English and Chinese, which
can be accessed here.
The Ministry has produced recommendations available in English for persons and organizations in response
to COVID-19.

What WHO is doing in Thailand
•
•
•

WHO Thailand remains in regular and direct contact with the Royal Thai Government through the Ministry
of Public Health, sharing information with the Government including key developments elsewhere, as well
as guidelines and updates;
WHO supports the wider UN response and provides relevant information and advice to staff of the UN
system in Thailand;
WHO is collaborating with UNICEF on supporting the Ministry of Public Health and Ministry of Education in
relation to special measures in schools and other educational institutions to safeguard against the spread
of 2019-nCoV.

USEFUL LINKS
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

For regular updates on WHO’s response in Thailand, access the WHO Thailand website:
www.who.int/thailand
For the latest worldwide figures and technical advice about the outbreak, including how to protect yourself,
access WHO Headquarters’ website: www.who.int including daily global situation reports and WHO’s
technical support worldwide to the COVID-19 response.
The International Health Regulations (IHR) can be viewed here.
For the latest on the Thai government response, access the Department of Disease Control, Thai
Ministry of Public Health 2019-nCoV landing page. *
The Department of Disease Control Hotline is 1422 (dialed from within Thailand).
The Thai Communicable Diseases Act (revised in 2015) is available here.
For a comprehensive 2019-nCoV global case-tracker, access the Johns Hopkins University’s Centre
for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE): in English and Thai.
Global research on novel coronavirus COVID-19
The Global Health Network - Coronavirus Outbreak Knowledge Hub - a pop-up area on The Global Health
Network serves as a knowledge hub and access to guidance on COVID-19.
(Note: WHO does not take responsibility for content on external websites.)

For more information or queries on WHO Thailand’s response to the 2019-nCoV outbreak, or our work
more widely, contact sethawebmaster@who.int, visit www.who.int/Thailand, and follow us on Twitter
and Facebook
i
This can be achieved through a combination of public health measures, such as rapid identification, diagnosis and management of
the cases, identification and follow up of the contacts, infection prevention and control in healthcare settings, implementation of health
measures for travellers, awareness-raising in the population and risk communication

