TECHNICAL REPORT
Novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2)
Discharge criteria for confirmed COVID-19 cases –
When is it safe to discharge COVID-19 cases from the hospital or
end home isolation?
This document has been produced upon request of an EU/EEA Member State. It suggests criteria to be
considered when deciding whether a confirmed COVID-19 case can be safely (i.e. without being infectious)
discharged from hospital or released from home isolation.
To address this request, the following working questions were developed:
 What is the duration of SARS-CoV-2 virus shedding in bodily fluids of symptomatic patients after remission
of symptoms?
 What is the duration of SARS-CoV-2 virus shedding in bodily fluids of asymptomatic patients?
 Which tests are available to document the lack of infectivity in a previously diagnosed infection?
 What is the longest documented transmission from an asymptomatic person?
Below ECDC provides a desk review of existing guidance documents and protocols from national and
international organisations and a convenient search of peer-reviewed publications.
What is the duration of SARS-CoV-2 virus shedding in
bodily fluids of symptomatic patients after remission of
symptoms?
SARS-CoV-2 virus can initially be detected 1–2 days prior to symptom onset in upper respiratory tract samples;
the virus can persist for 7–12 days in moderate cases and up to 2 weeks in severe cases (WHO mission to China
Report) [1]. In faeces, viral RNA has been detected in up to 30% of patients from day 5 after onset and up to 4
to 5 weeks in moderate cases. The significance of faecal viral shedding for transmission still has to be clarified
[1].
Prolonged viral shedding from nasopharyngeal aspirates – up to at least 24 days after symptom onset – was
reported among COVID-19 patients in Singapore [2]. Researchers from Germany also reported prolonged viral
shedding with high sputum viral load after recovery in a convalescent patient [3]. They acknowledge, however,
that viability of SARS-CoV-2 detected by qRT-PCR in this patient has not been proven by viral culture.
Prolonged virus shedding has been observed among convalescent children after mild infections, in respiratory
tract samples (22 days) and faeces (between two weeks and more than one month) [4].
A shift from positive oral swab samples during early infection to positive rectal swab samples during late infection
was observed on Chinese patients; the authors raised concerns about the fact that COVID-19 patients were
discharged from hospital on the basis of negative oral swabs [5].
Discharge criteria for confirmed COVID-19 cases ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT
2
Researchers from China report that in upper respiratory specimens, the pattern of viral nucleic acid shedding in
SARS-CoV-2-infected patients resembles that of patients with influenza; it also appears to be different from the
pattern seen in patients infected with SARS-CoV-1 [6].
ECDC comment: Although the oral-faecal route does not appear to be a driver of transmission, its significance
remains to be determined. Discharged patients should be advised to strictly follow personal hygiene precautions
in order to protect household contacts. This applies to all convalescing patients, but particularly to convalescent
children.
What is the duration of SARS-CoV-2 virus shedding in
bodily fluids of asymptomatic patients?
The virus has been detected in asymptomatic persons. Pan et al. report on a family cluster where a mother and a
child were both asymptomatic but had positive RT-PCR results [7] . Hoehl et al. (2020) also report that two out
of 114 Germans who were evacuated from Hubei province on 1 Feb 2020 tested positive in two throat swab
specimens by RT-PCR and presented no symptoms [8]. The two persons were isolated in a hospital in Frankfurt
where a faint rash and minimal pharyngitis was observed in one of them. Both patients were still well and
afebrile 7 days after admission. Potential infectivity was confirmed by virus culture.
Zou et al. 2020 report that the viral load of asymptomatic patients was similar to symptomatic patients,
indicating a transmission potential of asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic patients [6]. The study reports that
patients with few or no symptoms had modest levels of detectable viral RNA in the oropharynx for at least 5
days [6].
Potential transmission from asymptomatic persons has been reported. Bai et al. 2020 report a familial cluster of
five COVID-19 patients hospitalised with fever and respiratory symptoms that had contact before onset of
symptoms with an asymptomatic family member, a young 20-year-old woman, after her return from Wuhan. She
remained asymptomatic for the entire duration of laboratory and clinical monitoring (19 days) [9].
ECDC comment: Provided that there are sufficient resources, there is a clear benefit in testing asymptomatic
patients before they are released from isolation. However, in the context of limited resources for healthcare and
laboratories during the COVID-19 epidemic, the testing of symptomatic persons should have priority over the
testing of asymptomatic patients before release from isolation.
Which tests are available to document the lack of
infectivity in a previously diagnosed infection?
On its website, ECDC provides the following advice. The specific tests currently recommended by WHO for the
diagnosis and confirmation of SARS-CoV-2 are described on a dedicated WHO webpage. A single positive test
should be confirmed by a second RT-PCR assay targeting a different SARS-CoV-2 gene. A single negative SARS-
CoV-2 test (especially if from an upper respiratory tract specimen) or a positive test result for another respiratory
pathogen result does not exclude SARS-CoV-2 infection.
A high RT-PCR cycle threshold value (e.g. > 35) obtained as a result in E-gene RT-PCR could be due to E-gene
positive control contamination of reagents. In countries where the epidemic is not yet widespread, all positive
results should therefore be confirmed by a second gene target. In countries with a widespread epidemic, one
gene target is considered enough (see WHO’s updated laboratory guidance). However, confirmation of positive
test results that have high CT values should still be considered in all regions and countries.
What is the longest documented transmission from an
asymptomatic person?
There is insufficient evidence to provide a qualified answer to this question.
Significance of persistence of viral RNA vs. infectious virus?
Viral RNA can persist over long periods of time in bodily fluids. This does not necessarily mean that the person is
still infectious. Isolation of viruses in virus culture is needed to show the infectivity of the virus. Hoehl et al. 2020
reported infectious virus from two asymptomatic cases [8].
An overview of recommendations for the de-isolation of COVID-19 patients from national bodies in countries that
have experienced local transmissions of SARS-CoV-2 is presented in the Table below.
 Despite of some differences in practice, a consensus exists to combine a) the evidence for viral RNA
clearance from the upper respiratory tract with b) the clinical resolution of symptoms.
Discharge criteria for confirmed COVID-19 cases ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT
3
 At least two upper respiratory tract samples negative for SARS-CoV-2, collected at ≥ 24-hour intervals are
recommended to document SARS-CoV-2 clearance.
 For symptomatic patients after the resolution of symptoms, samples should be collected at least seven
days after the onset or after > 3 days without fever.
 For asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2-infected persons, the tests to document virus clearance should be taken at
a minimum of 14 days after the initial positive test.
 Italy indicates that serology tests to document IgG antibody specific to SARS-CoV-2 will be of value.
Table: Comparison of current guidelines on de-isolation of COVID-19 cases
Symptomatic cases, hospitalised Asymptomatic infections,
persons isolated at home
Ministero della salute,
Consiglio Superiore di
Sanità, Italy (28 February
2020)
A COVID-19 patient can be considered cured after the
resolution of symptoms and 2 negative tests for SARS-
CoV-2 at 24-hour intervals.
For patients who clinically recover earlier than 7 days
after onset, an interval of 7 days between the first and
the final test is advised.
Note: Virus clearance is defined as viral RNA
disappearance from bodily fluids of symptomatic and
asymptomatic persons, accompanied by appearance of
specific IgG.
Negative SARS-CoV-2 RNA test at
14 days after the first test (end of
the quarantine period).
China CDC
Diagnosis and treatment
protocol for COVID-19 patients
(trial version 7, revised)
Patients meeting the following criteria can be
discharged:
 Afebrile for >3 days,
 Improved respiratory symptoms,
 pulmonary imaging shows obvious absorption of
inflammation, and
 nucleic acid tests negative for respiratory tract
pathogen twice consecutively (sampling interval
≥ 24 hours).
After discharge, patients are recommended to continue
14 days of isolation management and health
monitoring, wear a mask, live in a single room with
good ventilation, reduce close contact with family
members, eat separately, keep hands clean and avoid
outdoor activities.
It is recommended that discharged patients should
have follow-up visits after 2 and 4 weeks.
National Centre for
Infectious Diseases (NCID)
Singapore
De-isolation of COVID-19
suspect cases: link
Discharge patient with advisory and clinic follow-up if
indicated and with daily wellness calls until day 14 after
last possible exposure, under the following conditions:
 Afebrile ≥ 24 hours,
 2 respiratory samples tested negative for SARS-
CoV-2 by PCR in ≥ 24 hours,
 Day of illness from onset ≥ 6 days
 OR
 Alternative aetiology found (e.g. influenza,
bacteraemia)
 OR
 Not a close contact of a COVID-19 case
 Does not require in-patient care for other reasons.
CDC USA
Interim guidance for
discontinuation of transmission-
based precautions and
disposition of hospitalized
patients with COVID-19: link
Negative rRT-PCR results from at least 2 consecutive
sets of nasopharyngeal and throat swabs collected ≥
24 hours apart from a patient with COVID-19 (a total of
four negative specimens)
AND resolution of fever, without use of antipyretic
medication, improvement in illness signs and
symptoms.
Note: decision to be taken on a case-by-case basis in
consultation with clinicians and public health officials
Discharge criteria for confirmed COVID-19 cases ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT
4
Symptomatic cases, hospitalised Asymptomatic infections,
persons isolated at home
CDC USA
Interim guidance for
discontinuation of in-home
isolation for patients with
COVID-19: link
At least 2 consecutive sets of
nasopharyngeal and throat swabs
collected ≥ 24 hours apart from a
patient with COVID-19 (a total of
four negative specimens)
AND resolution of fever, without use
of antipyretic medication,
improvement in illness signs and
symptoms.
Note: decision to be taken on a
case-by-case basis in consultation
with clinicians and public health
officials
Conclusions
When deciding on criteria for hospital discharge of COVID-19 patients, health authorities should take into
account several factors such as the existing capacity of the healthcare system, laboratory diagnostic resources,
and the current epidemiological situation.
In the early stages of SARS-CoV-2 spread (limited number of cases and no apparent sustained transmission:
scenarios 1 and 2 in ECDC’s Rapid Risk Assessment – fifth update) and with no pressure on healthcare facilities
and optimal laboratory testing capacity, COVID-19 patients may be discharged from hospital and moved to home
care (or other types of non-hospital care and isolation) based on:
 clinical criteria (e.g. no fever for > 3 days, improved respiratory symptoms, pulmonary imaging showing
obvious absorption of inflammation, no hospital care needed for other pathology, clinician assessment)
 laboratory evidence of SARS-CoV-2 clearance in respiratory samples; 2 to 4 negative RT-PCR tests for
respiratory tract samples (nasopharynx and throat swabs with sampling interval ≥ 24 hours). Testing at a
minimum of 7 days after the first positive RT-PCR test is recommended for patients that clinically improve
earlier.
 Serology: appearance of specific IgG when an appropriate serological test is available.
In the context of sustained widespread transmission (scenario 3 and 4 in ECDC’s Rapid Risk Assessment – fifth
update) with increasing pressure on healthcare systems or when healthcare facilities are already overwhelmed
and laboratory capacity is restrained, alternative algorithms for hospital discharge of COVID-19 patients are
warranted.
The discharge from hospital of mild cases – if clinically appropriate – may be considered, provided that they are
placed into home care or another type of community care. After discharge, 14 days of further isolation with
regular health monitoring (e.g. follow-up visits, phone calls) can be considered, provided the patient’s home is
equipped for patient isolation and the patients takes all necessary precautions (e.g. single room with good
ventilation, face-mask wear, reduced close contact with family members, separate meals, good hand sanitation,
no outdoor activities) in order to protect family members and the community from infection and further spread of
SARS-CoV-2.
Due to increasing evidence of virus shedding through faeces by convalescent patients, particularly children,
recommendations for careful personal hygiene precautions after de-isolation are warranted.
Discharge criteria for confirmed COVID-19 cases ECDC TECHNICAL REPORT
5
References
1. World Health Organization. Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-
19). Geneva: WHO; 2020. Available from: https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-
china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf.
2. Young BE, Ong SWX, Kalimuddin S, Low JG, Tan SY, Loh J, et al. Epidemiologic features and clinical
course of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 in Singapore. JAMA. 2020.
3. Rothe C, Schunk M, Sothmann P, Bretzel G, Froeschl G, Wallrauch C, et al. Transmission of 2019-nCoV
Infection from an asymptomatic contact in Germany. New England Journal of Medicine.
2020;382(10):970-1.
4. Cai J, Xu J, Lin D, Yang z, Xu L, Qu Z, et al. A case series of children with 2019 novel coronavirus
infection: clinical and epidemiological features. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2020.
5. Zhang W, Du R-H, Li B, Zheng X-S, Yang X-L, Hu B, et al. Molecular and serological investigation of 2019-
nCoV infected patients: implication of multiple shedding routes. Emerging Microbes & Infections. 2020
2020/01/01;9(1):386-9.
6. Zou L, Ruan F, Huang M, Liang L, Huang H, Hong Z, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Viral load in upper respiratory
specimens of infected patients. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020.
7. Pan X, Chen D, Xia Y, Wu X, Li T, Ou X, et al. Asymptomatic cases in a family cluster with SARS-CoV-2
infection. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020 2020/02/19/.
8. Hoehl S, Rabenau H, Berger A, Kortenbusch M, Cinatl J, Bojkova D, et al. Evidence of SARS-CoV-2
infection in returning travelers from Wuhan, China. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020.
9. Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, Tian F, Jin D-Y, Chen L, et al. Presumed Asymptomatic carrier transmission of
COVID-19. JAMA. 2020.
