Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use cookies to collect informationabout how you use GOV.UK. We use this information to make the website work as
well as possible and improve government services.
Coronavirus (COVID-19):
what you need to do
Hide message
Guidance
Guidance for those involved in managing COVID-19
deaths
Published 21 April 2020
Accept all cookies
Set cookie preferences
GOV.UK
Stay at home
Only go outside for food, health reasons or work (but only if you cannot work from home)
If you go out, stay 2 metres (6ft) away from other people at all times
Wash your hands as soon as you get home
Do not meet others, even friends or family.
You can spread the virus even if you don’t have symptoms.
Home Guidance for those involved in managing COVID-19 deaths
Cabinet Office
Contents
1. Information for the General Public: steps you must take when someone dies
2. For Local Authorities and Local Resilience Forums
3. For those who handle the deceased
4. For registration of a death
5. For Coroners and the coronial sector
6. For those who work in the funeral, burial and cremation sector
7. Legislation: Coronavirus Act 2020
1. Information for the General Public: steps you must take when someone
dies
What to do when someone dies: step by step
2. For Local Authorities and Local Resilience Forums
Section 58 and Schedule 28 to the Coronavirus Act 2020: Local death management Statutory guidance for local
authorities on Schedule 28 and the Powers in Relation to Transportation, Storage and Disposal of the Deceased
Guidance on closing certain businesses and venues under the Health Protection (Coronavirus Act 2020)
Health Protection (Coronavirus, Restrictions) (England) Regulations 2020
3. For those who handle the deceased
Guidance for Care of the Deceased with Suspected or Confirmed Coronavirus (COVID-19)
COVID-19 use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) by health and social care workers
Guidance for managing a funeral during the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic
PHE Collection of Coronavirus Guidance for health professionals and other organisations including guidance for care of
the deceased
PHE guidance for first responders and others in close contact with symptomatic people with potential covid-19 - Paragraph
11, handling the deceased
PHE guidance for medical practitioners reporting notifiable disease (includes Covid-19)
Coronavirus guide for clinicians and NHS managers (NHS England)A Collection of guidance for primary, secondary and
community health, social care, mental health trusts and ambulance services also includes a key document for palliative
care, including what to do at the time of death.
Coronavirus Act – excess death provisions: information and guidance for medical practitioners (NHS England)Guidance
for doctors regarding changes to completion of medical certificates of cause of death, and form Cremation 5 introduced by
the Coronavirus Act published 31 March 2020.
Methods of Decontamination
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH)
Blood-borne viruses laundry treatments
Managing infection risks when handling the deceasedGuidance for the mortuary, post-mortem room and funeral
premises, and during exhumation. This does not cover COVID-19 specifically but details standard infection control and
transmission- based precautions that should be followed.
4. For registration of a death
Completing a medical certificate of cause of death
Revised Notification of Death Regulations 2019 guidance, including how to remotely register a death
5. For Coroners and the coronial sector
Chief Coroner’s Guidance, Advice and Law Sheets to coronersRelevant guidance: Guidance No. 34: Chief Coroner’s
Guidance for coroners on Covid-19, Guidance No. 35: Hearings during a pandemic and Guidance No, 36: Summary of the
Coronavirus Act 2020, provisions relevant to coroners.
6. For those who work in the funeral, burial and cremation sector
Cremation Forms and Guidance for doctors, funeral directors and crematorium managers
Get help with funeral costs (Funeral Expenses Payment)
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
Coronavirus (COVID-19): what you need to do
Transition period
Transition period: check how to get ready
Services and information
Benefits
Births, deaths, marriages and care
Business and self-employed
Childcare and parenting
Citizenship and living in the UK
Crime, justice and the law
Disabled people
Driving and transport
Education and learning
Employing people
Environment and countryside
Housing and local services
Money and tax
Passports, travel and living abroad
Visas and immigration
Working, jobs and pensions
Departments and policy
How government works
Departments
Worldwide
Services
Guidance and regulation
7. Legislation: Coronavirus Act 2020
Coronavirus Act 2020
Coronavirus Act 2020 - Health Protection (Coronavirus Restrictions) Regulations
Is this page
useful? Yes No
Is there anything wrong with this
page?
News and communications
Research and statistics
Policy papers and consultations
Transparency and freedom of information releases
Help Privacy Cookies Contact Accessibility statement Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg
Built by the Government Digital Service
© Crown copyright
All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0, except where otherwise stated
