As on 06-03-2020
Government of India
Ministry of Health & FW
Consolidated Travel Advisory for COVID-19
In view of the evolving situation of COVID-19 across the world and in India, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare has issued travel advisories from time to time. The issued travel advisories are
consolidated as under:
Indian citizens are advised to refrain from travel to China, Iran, Republic of Korea, Italy & Japan
and advised to avoid non-essential travel to other COVID-19 affected countries.
Visa Restrictions
1. All regular (sticker) Visas/e-Visa (including VoA for Japan and South Korea) granted to nationals
of Italy, Iran, South Korea, Japan and issued on or before 03.03.2020 and who have not yet
entered India, stand suspended with immediate effect. Those requiring to travel to India due to
compelling reasons, may seek fresh visa from nearest Indian Embassy/Consulate.
2. Regular (sticker) visa / e-Visa granted to nationals of Peoples Republic of China, issued on or
before 05.02.2020 were suspended earlier. It shall remain in force. Those needing to travel to
India under compelling circumstances may apply for fresh visa to nearest Indian
Embassy/Consulate.
3. Regular (sticker) visas/e-Visas granted to all foreign nationals who have travelled to Peoples
Republic of China, Iran, Italy, South Korea and Japan on or after 01.02.2020, and who have
not yet entered India stand suspended with immediate effect. Those requiring traveling to India
under compelling circumstances may apply for fresh visa to nearest Indian Embassy/Consulate.
Compulsory Certification of having tested negative for COVID-19
4. In addition to Visa restrictions already in place, passengers traveling from /having visited Italy or
Republic of Korea and desirous of entering India will need certificate of having tested negative
for COVID-19 from the designated laboratories authorized by the health authorities of these
countries. This will be enforced from 0000 Hrs of 10th
March, 2020 and is a temporary measure
till cases of COVID-19 subside.
Universal Screening and self-declaration
5. All international Passengers entering into India are required to furnish duly filled self-declaration
form (including personal particulars i.e. phone no. and address in India) to Health Officials and
Immigration officials and undergo Universal Health Screening at the designated health counters
at all Points of Entry.
Exemptions
6. Diplomats, officials of UN and other International bodies, OCI cardholders and Aircrew from
above countries are exempted from such restriction on entry. However, their health screening is
compulsory.
Health measures to be followed at all times
 Those having compelling reasons to travel to COVID-19 affected countries (updated list available
at https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports) and
while abroad they should follow these simple public health measures at all times as under:
o Observe good personal hygiene.
o Monitor your health.
o Practice frequent hand washing with soap and water or use an alcohol based hand
sanitizer.
o Follow respiratory etiquettes - cover your mouth with tissue or handkerchief while
coughing.
o Avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth.
o Avoid close contact with people who are unwell or showing symptoms of illness, such as
cough, difficulty in breathing etc.
o Wear a mask if you have symptoms such as cough, fever or difficulty in breathing.
o Contact local doctor immediately if you have cough, fever or difficulty in breathing.
 While returning back to India, if a traveler feels sick during his/her journey:
o Inform the airlines crew about illness.
o Seek mask from the airline crew.
o Follow the directions of airline crew.
o Follow the direction of the airport health officer after disembarkation.
 If a traveler feel sick (cough/fever or difficulty in breathing) within 28 days after return
from COVID-19 affected areas:
o Immediately call the Helpline number (011-23978046), inform about your travel history
and follow the directions provided.
o Isolate yourself at home and wear a mask till such time you are examined by a doctor
from health authority.
o Follow the directions of the health authority
 For any queries related to health, people may contact Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 24*7
helpline number (+91-11-23978046) or email at (ncov2019@gmail.com)
