1
Information for healthcare professionals
Version 1.2: Published Friday 24 April 2020
Guidance for antenatal and postnatal
services in the evolving coronavirus
(COVID-19) pandemic
2
Table of changes
Version Date Summary of changes
1.1 17.4.20 3.1: Clarification added that face-to-face contacts are in person, physical
appointments.
1.1 17.4.20 3.2: Clarification added that remote appointments enable a partner or supporter to
join the appointment.
1.1 17.4.20 3.5: Clarified that independent midwives may be used to support service delivery.
1.1 17.4.20 4.1.1: Highlighted recommendation from RCOG/RCM coronavirus guidance to ask
about mental wellbeing at each appointment.
1.1 17.4.20 4.1.1: Modification to post-dates appointment to clarify that women should be
offered immediate induction of labour if practical and acceptable.
1.1 17.4.20 5: Highlighted recommendation from RCOG/RCM coronavirus guidance to offer
face-to-face and remote postnatal follow-up.
1.2 24.4.20 Appendix - Patient information: Removed Appendix, will be published separately in
due course.
3
1. Introduction
This guidance is for antenatal and postnatal services to support them during the evolving coronavirus pandemic.
This document intends to outline which elements of routine antenatal and postnatal care are essential and
which could be modified, given national recommendations for social distancing of pregnant women.
2. 
Providing a safe and responsive antenatal and
postnatal care service
General guidance for services is provided in the RCOG/RCM coronavirus guideline.
2.1 Provision of advice for women about antenatal and postnatal care
Maternity services should provide clear signposting for pregnant and postnatal women about changes to
antenatal and postnatal services on theirTrust or Health Board websites, through their social media accounts, or
through electronic notes. Key information for inclusion is detailed in appendix 1.
2.2 Providing face to face consultations safely
Where women require a face to face consultation due to the need for physical examination and/or screening,
a system should be in place for evaluating whether she has symptoms that are suggestive of COVID-19, or
if they meet current ‘stay at home’ guidance (criteria for England,Wales and Northern Ireland/ in Scotland).
This may be a telephone call prior to the appointment or an assessment at entry to the maternity setting, or
both.
If a woman attends an antenatal appointment but describes symptoms, she should be advised to return home
immediately. A member of clinical staff should then make contact with the woman to risk assess whether an
urgent home antenatal appointment is required, or whether the scheduled appointment can be delayed for a
period of 7 or 14 days.
Further information about processes for managing delayed appointments and local failsafes are available in the
RCOG/RCM coronavirus guidance.
4
3.	
Key principles for the provision of antenatal care
through the evolving coronavirus (COVID-19)
pandemic
3.1 Maintaining essential monitoring
Many elements of antenatal care may require in-person assessment, in particular blood pressure and urine
checks, measurement of fetal growth, and blood tests. Routine antenatal care is essential to detecting common
complications of pregnancy such as pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, and asymptomatic urine infection.
Current WHO guidance recommends a minimum of eight antenatal contacts for low risk women.1
There is a
shortage of evidence about rationalising visit numbers, but evidence from lower and middle income countries
suggests that attendance at five visits or less is associated with an increased risk of perinatal mortality (RR
1.15; 95% CI 1.01 to 1.32, three trials).2
A minimum of six face-to-face (physical) antenatal consultations is
therefore advised. There is no appropriate evidence about replacing this minimal antenatal care with remote
assessment.
3.2 Building remote care support capacity
Maternity services should, however, aim to maximise the use of remote means to provide additional antenatal
consultations. Remote consulting enables greater compliance with social distancing measures recommended
for pregnant women and maternity staff, while enabling a pregnant woman to have a partner, family member or
friend join the appointment for support.
Clinics can be run effectively using telephone or video consultations instead of face to face encounters.
Remote appointments will be appropriate for a range of consultations, including:
- Some routine or specialist antenatal and postnatal appointments
- Supporting women at risk of or currently experiencing mental health problems
5
-	
Maintaining contact with families living with a range of vulnerabilities or where there are safeguarding
concerns
- Discussion of plans for birth
- Provision of breastfeeding support and early parenting advice and guidance
Maternity staff should be provided with the technology and training to provide remote antenatal and postnatal
consultations. Consideration should be given to enabling staff who are identified as vulnerable or currently self-
isolating but well, to provide this remote support.
3.3 Use of home appointments
Home visits may be preferable, provided the woman and everyone in her household is well.
Maternity staff attending homes should be mindful of exposure to COVID-19 in a home visit and should
adhere to strict infection control procedures when entering and leaving homes. It has been shown that the
coronavirus can survive on surfaces for up to 17 days.3
Maternity staff should be provided with appropriate
personal protection equipment as per PHE guidelines when providing care for women with suspected infection
or when entering homes where other members of the household have symptoms.
3.4 Capacity
Maternity units will have differing capacity issues as the pandemic evolves.A daily discussion should be
scheduled with senior team members with oversight of the antenatal service, to review service provision and
available staff. Where required, the appointments highlighted in table 4.1.1 as being in-person appointments
should be prioritised.
3.5 Staffing numbers
Where there are acute staff shortages, existing systems for recruiting additional staff should be used. Maternity
support workers, midwifery students, independent midwives and obstetric team members can be used to
support core service delivery.
6
4. Antenatal appointments modified schedules
4.1 Low risk women
Where continuity models of care are in place and these are able to continue, women should receive care from
their continuity team and primary midwife.
•	
Women should, where possible, be offered a virtual booking appointment or a one-stop clinic
appointment that includes booking and scan together.
o In general, women should then have a minimum of six face-to-face antenatal contacts in total.
•	
Wherever possible, scans and antenatal appointments and other investigations should be provided
within a single visit, involving as few staff as possible.
•	
Suggested modifications to the existing schedule of antenatal care for low risk women, including where
face-to-face appointments can be replaced with remote assessments are detailed in the table in 4.1.1
•	
At all remote appointments, women should be asked about wellbeing and, if in third trimester, fetal
movements. If a woman is concerned about fetal movements or her physical wellbeing, physical
attendance should be advised at a designated site.
•	
Consider scheduling the post-dates appointment on a day where induction of labour can be
commenced (after 41+0, in line with NICE guidance).
• Consider using outpatient induction of labour for low risk women.4,5
4.1.1 Modifications to NICE Schedule of Antenatal Care6
for Low Risk women
•	
The antenatal appointment schedule will need to evolve in light of the impact of the pandemic on
staffing levels.
•	
In areas where the spread of the pandemic is in earlier stages and staffing allows, all of the
7
appointments below (green, amber and red) should be maintained for all women for as long as
possible.
•	
As staffing shortages increase during the course of the pandemic, services will need to consider
reducing appointments. The appointments shown below in green should be maintained.
•	
In line with recommendations made in RCOG/RCM guidance ‘Coronavirus infection in pregnancy’, all
women should be asked about their mental wellbeing at every appointment.
Visit Who What Modifications
1 Booking visit All women Full history, initial screening for medical,
psychological and social risk factors. Virtual booking where
possible, or one-
stop visit, with dating
scan and all testing in
maternity unit
1+ Dating scan All women Combined antenatal screening, all blood
tests, BP and urine testing to be taken at
dating scan appointment.
16 weeks All women Review results of screening review,
discuss and record the results of all
screening tests.
Reassess planned pattern of care for the
pregnancy and identify women who need
additional care.
Give information about ongoing care.
Virtual appointment or
omit as necessary
2 18-20 weeks All women Routine anomaly scan
Check BP and Urine at this visit instead
of 16 week appointment.
Maternity unit or
community unit with
ultrasound facilities
25 weeks Nulliparous
women
Measure fundal height, BP and urine;
review scan results.
Omit unless staffing
allows or additional
concerns
8
3 28 weeks All women Discuss current health.
Enquire about fetal movements.
Discuss mental wellbeing, and offer
advice and sources of further support
and information.
Follow up any safeguarding concerns.
Discuss plans for antenatal classes
(remote access).
Measure fundal height, BP and test
urine; repeat blood tests to screen for
anaemia and RBC allo-antibodies; anti-D
prophylaxis for Rh negative women.
Maintain appointment
31 weeks Nulliparous
women
Omit – replaced with 32/40 for all.
4 32 weeks All women Measure fundal height, BP and test urine;
discuss results of investigations at 28
weeks; discuss plans for birth. Discuss
wellbeing, fetal movements. Follow up
safeguarding issues.
Maintain appointments.
If need to reschedule
due to illness/
quarantine,
see or contact all
women within 3 weeks
of previous contact.
5 36 weeks All women Measure fundal height, BP and test urine;
discuss fetal movements and wellbeing,
discuss plans for birth and all usual care.
38 weeks Nulliparous
women only
Measure fundal height, BP and test urine
and all usual care
6 40 weeks All women Measure fundal height, BP and test urine;
give information about options for
prolonged pregnancy
Post dates from
41+0
(Locally agreed
protocol)6
All women Measure fundal height, BP and test urine;
discuss fetal movements and wellbeing
Appointment to be co-
scheduled with offered
outpatient / inpatient
IOL to avoid a further
attendanceT
T
- If, following careful discussion, a woman declines induction for prolonged pregnancy, remote consultation with
a senior obstetrician should be offered to discuss further steps.
9
4.2 Women at increased risk of complications
Some women (as many as 50%) have a condition or complication that necessitates additional appointments
or multi-disciplinary care during pregnancy. Those appointments that do not require measurement of fundal
height, blood or urine tests, or scans, should be provided remotely via video or teleconferencing.
4.2.1 
Triaging obstetric antenatal clinics to streamline services and reduce duplication
of hospital or healthcare worker contacts
In order to rationalise appointments, obstetric antenatal referrals can be triaged locally by a consultant with a
telephone appointment to discuss a proposed plan of care with the woman.This means that women in general
follow their schedule of care with the midwives and see obstetricians in a targeted way.
5. Postnatal care
Postnatal care should be individualised according to the woman and newborn’s needs.8
• The minimum recommended number of contacts is three: at day 1, day 5 and day 10.
•	
Maternity services should offer a combination of face-to-face and remote postnatal follow-up,
according to the woman and baby’s needs. Prioritise face-to-face visiting for women with:
o Known psycho-social vulnerabilities
o Operative birth
o Premature/low birthweight baby
o Other medical or neonatal complexities
•	
Where continuity models of care are in place and these are able to continue, women should continue
to receive care from their continuity team and primary midwife. Aim to ensure continuity of midwife
providing any remote postnatal care.
10
•	
Home visits may be preferable to community clinic visits to comply with social distancing, but maternity
staff safety must also be maintained.
• It may be necessary, as the pandemic progresses, to consider further amendments to postnatal care:
o Provision of care by senior student midwives and maternity support workers
o Reduction of face to face visits, particularly for healthy term multiparous women and their babies
• It is important to coordinate postnatal care with local health visitors to ensure smooth transfer of care.
•	
Remote support by third sector organisations will be invaluable to provide support for breastfeeding,
mental health and early parenting advice.
References
1.
WHO Reproductive Healthcare.WHO recommendation on antenatal care contact schedules.
(2016). Available from: https://extranet.who.int/rhl/topics/improving-health-system-performance/who-
recommendation-antenatal-care-contact-schedules
2. 
Dowswell,T. et al.Alternative versus standard packages of antenatal care for low-risk pregnancy. Cochrane Db
Syst Rev (2015) doi:10.1002/14651858.cd000934.pub3
3. 
Moriarty LF, Plucinski MM, Marston BJ, et al. Public Health Responses to COVID-19 Outbreaks on Cruise
Ships — Worldwide, February–March 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69:347-352. doi:10.15585/
mmwr.mm6912e3
4. National Institute for Care Excellence (NICE). Quality Standard 60: Inducing Labour. (2014).
5. RCM Midwifery Blue-Top Clinical Guidance 2: Midwifery Care for Induction of Labour. (2019).
6. 
National Institute for Care Excellence (NICE). Clinical Guideline 62:Antenatal Care for uncomplicated
pregnancies.
7. National Institute for Care Excellence (NICE). Clinical Guideline 70: Inducing Labour. (2008).
8. 
National Institute for Care Excellence (NICE). Clinical Guideline 37: Postnatal care up to 8 weeks after birth.
(2015).
11
Authors
Mary Ross-Davie, RCM Director
Jaki Lambert, Midwifery Advisor, Scottish Government
Lia Brigante, RCM Quality and Standards Advisor
Clare Livingstone, RCM Policy advisor
Susanna Crowe, RCOG Each Baby Counts Learn and Support/Royal London
Hospital
Pran Pandya, PHE/UCLH
Eddie Morris, RCOG
Pat O’Brien, RCOG
Jennifer Jardine, RCOG Obstetric Fellow
Sophie Relph, RCOG Obstetric Fellow
Gemma Goodyear, RCOG Obstetric Fellow
12
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 10-18 Union Street, London, SE1 1SZ
T: +44 (0) 20 7772 6200 E: covid-19@rcog.org.uk W: rcog.org.uk Registered Charity No. 213280
@RCObsGyn @rcobsgyn @RCObsGyn
DISCLAIMER: The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (RCOG) has produced this
guidance as an aid to good clinical practice and clinical decision-making.This guidance is based on
the best evidence available at the time of writing, and the guidance will be kept under regular review
as new evidence emerges.This guidance is not intended to replace clinical diagnostics, procedures
or treatment plans made by a clinician or other healthcare professional and RCOG accepts no
liability for the use of its guidance in a clinical setting. Please be aware that the evidence base for
COVID-19 and its impact on pregnancy and related healthcare services is developing rapidly and the
latest data or best practice may not yet be incorporated into the current version of this document.
RCOG recommends that any departures from local clinical protocols or guidelines should be fully
documented in the patient’s case notes at the time the relevant decision is taken.
